# The upper 16 bits of a 64-bit pointer

LLVM includes a `llvm.ptrmask` intrinsic for zeroing out bits in a pointer.
Doing this naively with `inttoptr` and friends would prevent alias analysis
from working correct. Typically, only the lower bits in a pointer are used
for tagging. This is how pointer tagging works in GHC. Sadly, this means that
only 3 bits (only 64-bit platforms) are available. They are available because
GHC unconditionally 8-byte aligns everything. On 64-bit platforms, it is
possible to use the upper 16 bits as well. It's kind of tricky because
you need to make sure that the upper 17 bits of the virtual address space
are all zero. That extra bit is because x86-64 sign-extends virtual addresses,
specifically for the purpose of making pointer tagging difficult. Nevertheless,
Mozilla has a [wonderful workaround](https://hg.mozilla.org/integration/mozilla-inbound/rev/dfaafbaaa291):

    /*
     * There might be similar virtual address issue on arm64 which depends on
     * hardware and kernel configurations. But the work around is slightly
     * different due to the different mmap behavior.
     *
     * TODO: Merge with the above code block if this implementation works for
     * ia64 and sparc64.
     */
     const uintptr_t start = UINT64_C(0x0000070000000000);
     const uintptr_t end   = UINT64_C(0x0000800000000000);
     const uintptr_t step  = ChunkSize;
    /*
     * Optimization options if there are too many retries in practice:
     * 1. Examine /proc/self/maps to find an available address. This file is
     *    not always available, however. In addition, even if we examine
     *    /proc/self/maps, we may still need to retry several times due to
     *    racing with other threads.
     * 2. Use a global/static variable with lock to track the addresses we have
     *    allocated or tried.
     */
     uintptr_t hint;
     void* region = MAP_FAILED;
     for (hint = start; region == MAP_FAILED && hint + length <= end; hint += step) {
         region = mmap((void*)hint, length, prot, flags, fd, offset);
         if (region != MAP_FAILED) {
             if ((uintptr_t(region) + (length - 1)) & 0xffff800000000000) {
                 if (munmap(region, length)) {
                     MOZ_ASSERT(errno == ENOMEM);
                 }
                 region = MAP_FAILED;
             }
         }
     }
     return region == MAP_FAILED ? nullptr : region;

This is a neat trick. Technically, it should be possible to grab more than 16
bits from the top of the address. Here are some other good resources related
to this topic:

* [Five-level page tables](https://lwn.net/Articles/717293/)
* [Value representation in JavaScript implementations](https://wingolog.org/archives/2011/05/18/value-representation-in-javascript-implementations)
* [x86-64 Virtual Address Space Details](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/X86-64#Virtual_address_space_details)
