# Modifying Arrays in Data Constructors

Consider a B Tree node:

    data Node a
      = Branch (Array 7 I64) (Array 8 (Node a))
      | Leaf (Array 7 I64) (Array 8 a)

If we want to do in-place mutation, how do we do it? The arrays are not
first-class heap objects that can be passed around. LLVM needs to compute
their addresses with GEP so that if GC happens, it can recompute them.
However, function boundaries pose a problem. All the magic GEP recalculation
stuff only works within the body of a function. So, if we pass an `Array 7 I64`
to another function, it *must* be passed by value, not by reference. This
restriction is fine when we are dealing with read-only (immutable) arrays,
but it's a problems once we starting thinking about mutable arrays. The problem
is that mutable arrays have identity. That is, we cannot mutate a copy passed
by value because that would change the wrong array.

Marlow and Tibell had an idea for
[unpacking arrays in GHC](https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/wikis/unpacking-arrays)
years ago. This was never implemented, but it's a decent starting point.
Adapting this a little bit, let's say that arrays can be passed around, but
rather than passing around the pointer to the array itself, you pass around
the pointer to the data constructor in which the array lives, accompanied
by an offset. Computing the base address of the array is a GEP, so now LLVM's
statepoint machinery will be happy.

But wait! On the aforementioned GHC wiki page, there is a section titled
"Construction" with the first sentence reading:

> ToDo: we have no idea what to do here... yet 

Opening up a data constructor and getting the array out is straightforward,
but constructing a new value with the data constructor is tricky. How do we
get the `Array` to put in the data constructor? The wiki page speculates
about an absurd hack (`newInteriorArrayContainer#`). I'd like to present
an alternative. If data types have mutable variants in the spirit of
[mutable constructor fields](https://github.com/simonmar/ghc-proposals/blob/mutable-fields/proposals/0000-mutable-fields.rst)
but with in-place freezing supported, then we could restrict construction
to only support the mutable variants. The immutable `Branch` data
constructor could not be used to construct an immutable `Node`, but it
could be used to deconstruct it. And a mutable `MBranch` (just making
that name up), with mutable fields but not recursively mutable nodes,
could be used to construct a `Node`:

    -- This function is nonsense but illustrates the idea
    replaceFarLeft : Node Foo -> Node Foo -> Node Foo
    replaceFarLeft (Branch ks vs) newVal = runST $ do
      node@(MBranch ks' vs') <- allocate MBranch -- filled with mostly garbage
      copy ks' ks -- dest, then source 
      copy vs' vs
      write vs' 0 newVal
      freeze node

I think that this works, although since the heap object is originally
filled with garbage, it needs to be allocated on an auxiliary heap. This
is not a huge problem though. Another thing worth noting is that this
is incompatible with linear types. Like, super incompatible. It relies
heavily on aliasing (both `node` and `vs'` are in scope at the same time).
