# Fast Equality Checks for Small Values

Here is an interesting problem that I have seen show up in the context of
compiler implementation. I do not know where else it shows up, but I think
it is worth describing because it's a problem to which immutable-by-default
languages may be able to handle elegantly. Here is the issue. Suppose
we have a syntax-tree data type with an infinite number of inhabitants
where in practice, the number of distinct values will be small, something
like this:

    data Type
      = Arrow Type Type
      | Integer
      | Boolean

The idea is that the type `Int -> Int -> Bool` (the type of the inequality
operators) is represented by `Arrow Integer (Arrow Integer Boolean)`.
There are two unrelated issues that I have seen crop up when dealing
with syntax trees like this:

1. Duplication. Certain types, like the one of inequality operators listed
   above, are common. Every time the type is built from its constituent
   parts, it is an extra copy on the heap. This wastes space.
2. Slow equality tests. Testing for equality requires traversing both
   structures simultaneously. This can mean following several pointers
   when function types are compared.

Typically, these issues are handled in library space or application space,
not by the compiler or runtime. Common strategies include memoization tables,
GHC's `reallyUnsafePointerEquality#`, and one-off checks for "common values"
at certain sites of data construction. None of these are particularly pleasant
to work with. Memoization tables require functions that would otherwise be
pure functions to perform mutation. That is, it is invasive. The other two
options are less invasive (no mutation), but they tend to be incomplete. That is,
common types like `Int -> Int` would be checked for, but longer types would
not be deduplicated. Which types to check for is based an the author's guesses,
and the author must remember to guard data construction carefully. Another
option is doing deduplication during garbage collection. When paired with
`reallyUnsafePointerEquality#`, the performance of an application could vary
wildly depending on whether or not the GC ran at the right moment. The right
moment could cause the equality checks to get the pointer equality shortcut.

How can we solve both problems? Problem (2) can only be addressed by some kind
of memoization. We would like to *always* do equality checks by comparing
memory addresses, never having to inspect (possibly traverse) the payload. If
the addresses are stable, we could even put the values in a hash table.
Ordering is different beast entirely and will not be discussed. All of the
heavy lifting needs to be in the construction of data. There needs to be
a hash table to map argument combinations to memory addresses containing 
the materialized values. This would make construction somewhat expensive.
The support from the runtime means that, even though mutation is used
under the hood, it is not observable. In this respect, it is similar to
how GHC uses mutation to implement laziness.

Turning aside for a moment, if the data type was not recursive (and consequently
had a finite number of inhabitants), it would be possible to handle both
construction and pattern matching with bit arithmetic. Simple masks and
shifts could check for constructors, expose the element inside the constructor,
etc. As cool as this approach would be, I unfortunately cannot think of
a situation where the restriction to non-recursive data would be acceptable.
Not only that, it would be necessary to keep any fields small too. You would
want for the size of the whole thing to stay under a machine word.

Coming back to recursive data, I think that the runtime-managed hash table
is the best way to go. The hash table would only be consulted when constructing
data, not when checking it for equality and not when performing a standard
pattern match on it. This is basically just the old hash-cons idea. Nothing
new here. And there are difficulties with concurrent execution since hash
tables do not usually support concurrent update.

I wish there were a better way. One idea that comes to mind is just flattening
out everything into a variable-length sequence of bytes. You lose all of the
deduplication stuff. In fact, you just lose sharing entirely. And then
equality checks are just `memcmp`. This seems like an awful idea though
because of the extra memory consumption.

Maybe the old-school hash-consing idea is the only way to go. The penalty
for creating data seems high, but if the data is going to stay around for
a long time and has lots of equality tests, then this is probably alright.
The advantages that a runtime-supported solution would have over a
library-space solution would be:

* Lower mental overhead. Everything would look normal.
* Better identity guarantees. The runtime-supported solution would know
  not to apply optimizations like worker wrapper. It would know to pin
  objects. It could use the memory addresses of the object as keys into
  the hash map.

Finally, let's look at a slightly more realistic example of a data type:

    data Type
      = Arrow Type Type
      | Application TyCon Type
      | Tuple (Array Type)
      | Constant GroundType
      | Var Int -- possibly de bruijn

There are some questions about this that need answering. What exactly is
`GroundType`? Is it just a number that identifies the type (an index into
a table)? Or is it a pointer to a full description of a type? Same question
for `TyCon`. Making them numbers has drawbacks. The numbers must be valid
indices into some map. How can this be ensured? Indexing `Type`? Gross.
Also, making them numbers means that more indirections must be followed
to get information about the type (e.g. its kind). Using a pointer is
appealing because pointers don't have problems with bounds. If it is a
pointer though, we probably want to be hash-consing `GroundType` as
well. And it's probably worth doing that. When it comes to types and
type constructors and kinds, we really do want to be operating in a
"there is only one of this" world.

Identity is a powerful property for a type. In GHC Haskell, this is restricted
to unlifted mutable types (e.g. `MutVar#`). But hash-consing opens the door
to making this property available to other data. Particularly with ground
types, we really do just create them once, and then after that, we just
read them, and two ground types should only ever be equal if they are
the same pointer. With `ST`, GHC gives us reference equality on mutable
things, but then we don't get a way to say "stop having this be mutable
now, I just want the reference equality", so we cannot inspect the fields.
But what if we could? Hash consing gives us this, but hash consing does
too much work in the case of ground types. With ground types, they are
just all distinct, end of story. We don't really care that their fields
were distinct. For ground types, what we need is a mechanism for assigning
identity. Using Haskell-like syntax, this interface might look like this:

    data GroundType = GroundType
      { name :: Text
      , module :: Text
      , kind :: Kind
      }
    data GroundTypeRef -- magic, cannot be constructed except by makeRef
    makeRef :: GroundType -> IO GroundTypeRef
    eqRef :: GroundTypeRef -> GroundTypeRef -> Bool

In the above example, calling `makeRef` twice on the same value would
result in two `GroundTypeRef`s that are not considered equal to one another.
Values of type `GroundTypeRef` could have any of `GroundType`'s accessors
applied to them. You would lose the ability to construct values, but you
would gain fast equality tests. A slightly different flavor of this would
be to tag reference types with a world:

    data GroundTypeRef : World -> Type
    makeRefs :: Functor f => f GroundType -> IO (exists s. f (GroundType s))
    eqRef :: GroundTypeRef s -> GroundTypeRef s -> Bool

This is kind of a pain to use because you have to figure out how to
hit all the values at the same time in a covariant container, and it
requires the use of existential types, but it has the advantage of
preventing the user from accidentally mixing worlds. The world-tagging
probably does not carry its weight.

What's the purpose of these reference types? Why not just stick a uuid
inside each one and call it a day? The benefits I see are:

1. Equality test can avoid following a pointer.
2. A built-in hash-consing scheme would know what to do with fields
   that were reference types. It would be more difficult to know what
   to do on the plain `GroundType` type. The user could supply a
   definition of equality, but it would be nicer to just be able to use
   the pointer itself.
   
