# More Linear Let Bind Thoughts

Yesterday, I proposed something like `let` that is just for allocating
linear values:

    foo : Int -> Bool
    foo y =
      alloc x = mkEmptyMap
         in ...

But this unfortunately doesn't avoid all the problems I was hoping to
avoid. Consider:

    foo : Int -> Bool
    foo z =
      alloc x = mkEmptyMap in
      alloc y = mkEmptyMap in
      ...

This is alright since CSE on the RHS of `alloc` is not allowed. But
this can be twarted with:

    foo : Int -> Bool
    foo z =
      let x' = (alloc x = mkEmptyMap in x) in
      let y' = (alloc y = mkEmptyMap in y) in
      ...

We don't want CSE to common up `x'` and `y'`, but to prevent this, we
need some weird rule that says "no CSE when RHS of `let` has a particular
type". I was hoping for there to be a more straightforward, syntax-driven
possibility for this. Consider also that a function with non-linear arguments
but a linear result needs to allocate a brand new object every time.
Again, CSE would be devastating, but how can it be prevented cleanly?
One thought is to restrict the position of `alloc`, to say that `alloc`
cannot appear inside of `let` expressions, that it must appear at the
beginning of its closing context. This works, but it makes inlining unsound.
Inlining could cause this:

    foo : Int -> Map*
    foo v =
      alloc m0 = mkEmptyMap in
      Map.insert 42 v m0
    bar : (Int,Int) -> Map*
    bar (a,b) =
      let c = a + b in
      let m = foo c in
      m

After inlining `foo` into `bar`, our invariant would be violated. But also,
there is something bad going on in the previous example. What if bar had
instead been written as:

    bar : (Int,Int) -> X
    bar (a,b) =
      let c = a + b in
      let m = foo c in
      let m2 = foo c in
      ...

We do not want to allow `m` and `m2` to be commoned up. Perhaps the real
issue is this: Functions with non-linear arguments and linear results are
different. We don't run into this CSE problem with all kinds of linear
functions. Consider these:

    insert : k -> v -> Map* k v -> Map* k v
    insertMany : [(k,v)] -> Map* k v -> Map* k v

Neither of these have a "CSE problem". Why? Because there is no way to
call `insert` on the same `Map` identifier twice. The type system will
prevent it. It's only when we conjure up a `Map` out of thin air that
things get tricky. Perhaps such functions deserve different types.
For example:

    foo : Int >-> Map*
    foo _ = ...
    bar : (Int,Int) -> Bool
    bar (a,b) =
      let c = a + b in
      alloc m = foo c in ...

That's a little better. We still have the "no `alloc` in `let` expr"
requirement. Also, notice that `bar` is only an ordinary function
because it returns a non-linear type. If it returned something linear,
it would need to use the `>->` function arrow. Speaking of which,
how can these allocating functions actually be written? Roughly, the
rules must be:

* If you `alloc` and return anything linear derived from it, you
  must use the `>->` arrow.
* Otherwise, you are free to use the `->` arrow.

But what does being "derived" from a value mean? Also, this definition
is not really sufficient. We would like to be able to insert a freshly
allocated value into a `Map` with:

    insertLinear : Map* -> Map*
    insertLinear m =
      alloc v = ... // build the value
      in Map.insert 42 v m

Here, the normal function arrow is sufficient because the `Map*` argument
itself is enough to prevent bad CSE. Or is it. Two calls to `insertLinear`,
both inlined, would dump identical `alloc v = ...` into scope. This is
all really tricky. I wonder how Linear Haskell is hoping to address these
kinds of problems. One possibility for `insertLinear` is to allow `alloc`
to tether an allocation to any other linear value:

    insertLinear : Map* -> Map*
    insertLinear m =
      alloc v @ (m to m') = ... // build the value
      in Map.insert 42 v m'

Here, the idea is that `alloc` takes `m` as a fake argument (and returns
the identical `m'`), so for the purposes of CSE, the `alloc` will not
look the same as other `alloc`s. It is a little odd, but it does work.

Synthesizing all of this, the guiding principle is that `alloc` needs
a way to "stay in place". If you have a linear object lieing around,
you can tie `alloc` to that, and then `alloc` is just like any old
`let` binding concerning floating and CSE. But when you don't have
anything to tie it to, the punishment is that you are no longer considered
an ordinary function. You are a function whose applications must not be
commoned up.

Hmmm... This still isn't great. What if `alloc` could *only* be used
with an extra argument to keep it tethered. And then rather than having a
tether-free `alloc` available, you could use CPS or IO to keep things
in place. With IO, it's easy, you've already got an order enforced. With
CPS, it's trickier, and you couldn't allow the linear values to escape.
You would need:

    withLinear : forall (a : Linear) (b : Unrestricted). (a -> b) -> b

It would be seeded with the "empty" value for whatever linear type was
being used. Since `withLinear` would be primitive (never inlines), everything
would work out. I don't love this, but it does make everything easy. No special
CSE rules. All user-defined functions can inline. You do have to come up with
a magic "empty" value for every linear type, which is weird, but I think
that there should be a way to do this. Alternatively, you could just have
one or more magic `withX` functions for everything linear type.

Also, one thing that's kind of nice about this approach, or at least about
the IO part of the approach, is that it offers a nice way to deal with file
descriptors. Let's say you had a `openFileUnsafe` that just gave you back a
file descriptor. You could build something safer on top with:

    FileDescriptor : WordRep
    openFile : Effect World Path FileDescriptor*
    openFile path = do
      fd <- openFileUnsafe path
      fd' <- unboxedToLinearEffect fd
      return fd'

Very simple. Whether or not this is actually a good idea, I don't know.
You fix the double-close problem, but all the reads and writes to the
file descriptor might become more difficult. Perhaps though, in the
context of an effect, you could steal a page from Rust's book and do
a borrow against it where everything execpt for closing the descriptor
is fair game.
