# Nosk and the Heap Pointer

I've been working on a compiling a GRIN-like language (basically GRIN with
explicit join points) to LLVM. Everything has been going reasonably well.
Recently, I started trying to support stores and loads to and from the
heap. Previously, I had only been working with integral types. That is,
everything lived on the stack and in registers. The heap makes things
more difficult. Here is some example generated code:

    %list-w32-cons = type {i32, i32, %list-w32-cons*}
    define external ccc  i32 @exampleFunction(i32  %x, i32  %y)    {
    beginning:
      %z = add   i32 %x, %y
      %hp.list.1 = bitcast i64* %hp1 to %list-w32-cons*
      %hp.list-w32-elem.1 = getelementptr inbounds %list-w32-cons, %list-w32-cons* %hp.list.1, i64 0, i32 1
      %hp2 = getelementptr inbounds i64, i64* %hp1, i32 3
      ret i32 %x
    }

This code above is only meant to illustrate how GEP may be used to compute
heap addresses. LLVM will reject this bcause `hp1` is not in scope. The big
question is how to thread the heap pointer through all the necessary places.
One straightforward trick is to scan every top-level declaration before
beginning compilation and ask: Can this allocate? A function allocates
if it ever uses a GRIN `Store` expression or if it calls other functions
that allocate. That's it. A non-allocating function can be compiled just
as it was compiled before. An allocating function requires several changes:

* An extra argument for the initial heap pointer
* An extra return value for the final heap pointer. GHC threads `HpLim`
  around everywhere, but I think it could simply be computed on demand.
* Function calls to allocating functions need to be fed the current
  heap pointer. They return a new heap pointer.

At first, I thought this was going to be daunting. But after having
reading [Chapter 7](https://llvm.org/docs/tutorial/MyFirstLanguageFrontend/LangImpl07.html)
of the Kaleidoscope tutorial, I realized that just using `alloca`
to put the heap pointer on the stack and doing in-place mutation
of it is fine. LLVM has a very powerful pass called `mem2reg` that
can turn this kind of code into the appropriate phi nodes (with
no store and loads to and from the stack).

Now that I'm aware of this pass, I wonder if it is a better way to
handle things like `let x = case in ...`. It would work pretty well
in the simple case where there are no loops (i.e. recursive join points).
Even with recursive join points, it should be possible to have the
arguments be stack allocations and then just store the arguments
in the right places just prior to branching. That is, there would
be no phi nodes in the generated source. The GRIN project does not
appear to use `alloca` anyway. Just a data point.

Here's a simple example of doing this:

    define i32 @example(i32 %x) {
    begin:
      %r = alloca i32
      %b = icmp eq i32 %x, 5
      br i1 %b, label %alpha, label %beta
    alpha:
      store i32 7, i32* %r
      br label %end
    beta:
      store i32 13, i32* %r
      br label %end
    end:
      %result = load i32, i32* %r
      ret i32 %result;
    }

LLVM can turn this into:

    define i32 @example(i32 %x) local_unnamed_addr #0 {
    begin:
      %b = icmp eq i32 %x, 5
      %. = select i1 %b, i32 7, i32 13
      ret i32 %.
    }

One thing I have noticed is that you don't get any errors when performing
load-before-store. Loading from the pointer that `alloca` gives you
without writing to it first is just considered undefined behavior. I
wish that it was an error instead.
