# Arenas in IO

In `IO`, we would like to be able to use arenas. This can be accomplished
with:

    withArena : (Token -> (Token, a)) -> Token -> (Token, a)

There are some restrictions on `a`. It must be nonlinear. I am not sure
if it is allowed to be mutable data or not. It is allowed to be Unit.
If it's Unit, then the arena is simply destroyed when the callback
completes. What if some of the mutable data from `withArena` had
been frozen and is returned? I'm not sure.

Is there a way to decompose `withArena` into initialize and finalize
functions? Thinking about only the `Unit` case, perhaps:

    newArena : Token -> (Token, Restore)
    freeArena : (Token,Restore) -> Token

This does not work because it does not prevent freed objects from being
used after deallocation. One option is to tag objects with a type
variable indicating what region they belong to. This is the Tofte and
Talpin tradition, adopted later by Cyclone. It requires existential
types, and it exposes more annotations to the programmer. My hope
is that it is possible to do something less expressive that is more simple
to use.

Maybe `withArena` is fine. It has the First-In-Last-Out problem that
Tofte and Talpin's system did. However, it is explicitly under programmer
control, which makes it a little easier to reason about.

What about things like Haskell's `IORef`? One of my goals is to avoid
old-points-to-new entirely, so all mutable values must be either:

* Always considered when scanning the youngest generation.
* Ignored for purposes of GC.

The second option is only possible when the transitive closure of
an object is mutable. Additionally, cross-thread sharing must be heavily
restricted. Erlang-style copying, coordinated by mutexes, is the only option.
So, how can something like `IORef` play with `withArena`? If the reference
is to memory without any pointers (like a `struct` of integers), then
modification of the object is fine within `withArena`. If there are pointers
to immutable objects, then reassigning these pointers is fine. Pointers to
mutable objects are the tricky part. If these are reassigned to something
allocated in the arena, then we are in trouble. Such an object should be
deallocated at the end of `withArena`, but this would leave a dangling
pointer.

There is always the possibility of introducing restrictions on what `withArena`
is allowed to close over. That's an odd solution though.
