# Linear Types, State Tokens, and Mutable Data

This is a line of thought for how to incorporate linear types into a language
in a way that makes them useful. First thing: no linearity polymorphism. Second
thing: no linear fields inside of boxed values. For example, this is not
allowed (asterisk means linear):

    data MyBoxedFoo : Box = MyBoxedFooC
      { name :: Text
      , descriptor :: FileDescriptor*
      }

None of that. Maybe it could be supported, but I haven't been thinking about
that situation at the moment. Functions would never have linear types. That is,
closing over a linear value would be disallowed. Unboxed types (like tuples)
could have linear fields, and the linearity of the fields determines the
linearity of the tuple as a whole. One linear field is sufficient to make the
entire tuple linear:

    <FileDescriptor*,Int,Int> ==> multiplicity one
    <Int,Int>                 ==> multiplicity many

Unboxed sums would work the same way. How is in-place mutation supported?
The language need to support mutable data constructor fields. Such fields
cause a type to have identity. Identity means that pointer equality test
is a meaningful operation. Here is an example:

    mutable data Node : State -> Box
      = Branch {left : Node s, middle : Int, right : Node s }
      | Nil
    mkBranch : <{left : Node s, middle : Int, right : Node s }, Token* s> -> <Node s, Token* s>
    mkNil : Node s
    possiblyChangeValue : <Node s, Int, Token* s> -> Token* s
    possiblyChangeValue <node, v, t0> = case node of
      Branch x -> do
        let t1 = assign x.middle v t0
         in t1
      Nil -> t0

The tokens are just GHC's `State#` tokens, but they have linear types
to more accurately capture the way they are expected to be used. Notably,
`Node` is *not* linear. The important trick is to create an opaque unboxed
tuple and then hide the original function under that:

    unboxed data NodeL* : <Boxed,<>*>
      = NodeL <Node World, Token* World>
    possiblyChangeValueL : <NodeL*,Int> -> NodeL*
    possiblyChangeValueL <NodeL <node,t0>, v> =
      NodeL <node,possiblyChangeValue <node,v,t0>>

Nothing unsafe was required to do this. Notice that, in this instance, the
argument was copied into the result. This will not always be necessary. It
is in this case because the function always modifies the argument rather
than embedding it in a new node.

A few comments:

* What is the multiplicity of the nullary tuple kind? It is probably
  `Many`. We might need a separate representation that has multiplicity
  `One` but is empty.
* How about actions that do not need to happen in a fixed order?
  This requires a fork and join for tokens. These allow the user to
  create unsound behavior, but I think that is fine.
* Every linear type would want to provide a function that lets the
  user fork a state token out of it. For example: `fork : Node* -> <Node*,Token* World>`.
  This makes it possible for a user to allocate a new linear value
  (with something like `mkBranch`) when any other linear value
  is available.
* `World` is probably a bad bet since this would let the user perform
  arbitrary IO. We probably want something else.

This whole system is good but not great. It does require explicit
token manipulation, but that should be ok. Also, even if we split up
`World` and some kind of restricted `World`, it should be possible to
have this:

    weirdFork : Token* World -> <Token* World, Token* Restricted>
    weirdJoin : <Token* World, Token* Restricted> -> Token* World

There is no reason to allow more than one `Token* World` to exist ever
because its purpose is interactions with file descriptors, sockets, etc.
Such operations should always be ordered explicitly.
