# More thoughts on targetting LLVM

Roughly, this is the interface I have in mind:

    data Blocks = Blocks
      { self :: AST.BasicBlock
      , children :: [Blocks]
        -- ^ Places that self may jump to. No particular order implied.
      }
    flattenBlocks :: Blocks -> [AST.BasicBlock]
    makeBlocksRet :: Expr -> Blocks
    -- | Needed to handle case statements. None of the the resulting blocks
    -- have a ret instruction. Probably should take RHS of @let x = case ...@
    -- rather than an arbitrary expression.
    makeBlocksBind :: Expr -> [Result n] -> (Blocks,[Result n])

Blocks are arranged as a tree, which implies a particular order. However,
the actual order of blocks does not really matter. The tree is a just a
convenient way to cheaply accumulate blocks. In the end, we flatten it out.
Essentially, it functions as a builder. Using list directly is a bit of a
mess since it requires threading the list through lots of functions. It's
nicer to just have the block-building functions return a value, rather than
consing it onto an argument.

It's probably worthwhile to do the same trick with `makeBlocksBind`. We do
not want to cons results onto an argument. The tree strategy should work fine
there as well.

The other big idea here is to attempt to push label generation into a different
pass. In the journal entry on 2020-07-26, I discussed the idea of decorating
an expression with additional type information. There, I intended that all
variables would be looked up, and a new syntax tree would include everything
from the original one, but all uses of variables would include their types.
This makes it possible to avoid context lookups in a later pass. Here, I
suggest going further. What if all labels could be generated in advance?
Every arm of a case statement would need to be labeled. The case statements
themselves need to be labeled as well. Let binding do not need labels. Neither
do function applications. By pushing this complexity into a different pass,
the actual codegen should become easier to read.
