# Stacks vs Fingers

Consider the case of inserting into a persistent map. What's the approach?
Well, you walk your way down the map until you reach the leaf that you
need to modify or you are adjecent to where the new leaf needs to be created.
Then, you work your way back up. After call, working your way down to the
node wasn't tail recursion, and on the way back up, you have to build the
new map, sharing a lot of the old one.

There's a different way to do this, one that does use tail recursion. It's
not any faster, but let's talk about it anyway. Let's say you have a super
goofy map with no balance guarantee at all. It's just easier to describe
the algorithms involved this way. We use a variant of a zipper that omits
the key at the leaf. It also expressed whether or not a value at the key
was found.

    data Map k v
      = Branch (Map k v) k (Map k v)
      | Leaf k v
    data Crumb k v
      = Leftward k (Map k v)
      | Rightward (Map k v) k
    data OptionalFinger k v
      = Found k v [Crumb k v]
      | Missing [Crumb k v]
    data RequiredFinger k v
      = Required k v [Crumb k v]
    
Now we can cut a modify into two different recursive functions:

    search :: Map k v -> k -> OptionalFinger k v
    reconstruct :: RequiredFinger k v -> Map k v

Any modification at a particular key is just: search, adjust the
finger (the head of it), reconstruct the tree. Both `search` and
`reconstruct` have tail recursion implementations. Essentially,
we reify the stack in the heap to accomplish this.

Why would doing this be beneficial?

* Map modification functions often take callbacks. These need to be
  represented by closures. Maybe you do not want to allocate a closure.
  With `search` and `reconstruct`, a modification function becomes brief
  enough to unconditionally inline.
* The `alterF` function provided by `containers:Data.Map.Strict` performs
  needless allocation of intermediate data structures when the functors is
  offers nondeterministism. Granted, this is an extremely uncommon use
  case.
* Again, thinking about `alterF`, for a short-circuiting functor, this
  let's you avoid walking all the way back up the stack. Instead, you
  get to just throw away the finger.

What are the problems with reifying the stack in this way? The biggest
problem is that you eat up space on the heap, space that could have been
promptly reclaimed if you were working on the stack instead. That's a bad
trade. But what if you did region allocation instead?

    data Crumb@r k v
      = Leftward k (Map k v)
      | Rightward (Map k v) k
    data OptionalFinger@ k v
      = Found k v [Crumb@r k v]@r
      | Missing [Crumb@r k v]@r
    data RequiredFinger@r k v
      = Required k v [Crumb k v]@r

The above notation tries to make clear which objects are actually in which
regions. For example, a `Crumb` is always allocated into a regions, but the
map inside it is a pointer to the normal heap. Now we have:

    alter :: Map k v -> k -> (Maybe v -> Maybe v) -> Map v
    alter m k f = letregion r in
      let fng = search r m k
      let tweaked = tweak f fng
       in reconstruct tweaked

I think `reconstruct` does not need to take the region since does not allocate
anything else into the region. Is all this worth doing? No idea. But I wonder
what other contexts the idea of stack reification might show up in. This
does seem like a kind of neat trick for the control flow stuff more than
for any other reason. Getting a little more realistic, think about the case
where you need to set something in a map, but it is likely to already be set
to that value.
