# Polymorphism and Arrays of Refined Numbers

This is an extension of the idea discussed in 2020-09-17. If we have a
data type with monomorphicly bounded numbers, we want to use the smallest
size possible when we go to represent them on the heap. For example:

    record TimeOfDay =
      { hour : Int | >=0 && <24
      , minute : Int | >=0 && <60
      , second : Int | >=0 && <60
      }

Each of these three of these fields should be represented by an 8-bit
word. Easy. Let's try something with a polymorphic field:

    record Annotated a =
      { annotation : Annotation
      , value : a
      }

Now it's less clear. If the types `Annotated (Int | >=0 && <100)` (integer
that can be handled by 8 bits) and `Annotated (Int | >=0 && <2000)` (integer
that can be handled by 16 bits) have different representations, then upcasting
is no longer a no-op. Since upcasting really needs to be a no-op, it is
probably best to just make all flavors of `Annotated Int` use 64 bits for
the integer. In this case and in many cases like it, this has little
or no performance cost if the language rounds up heap object sizes to the
nearest multiple of a machine word.

But there is a case where this is more costly. When we are dealing with
arrays of numbers, this element inflation can lead to unacceptable overhead.
For example, `Array (Int | >=0 && <10)` could use 1 byte per element, but
with the above scheme, on a 64-bit platform, it needs 8 bytes per element.
The workaround is to introduce types for small integers:

* `Int : Word 64`
* `Int | >=0 && <40 : Word 64`
* `Int8 | >=0 && <40 : Word 8`
* `Int8 | >=0 && <1000`. Type error.
* `upcast : Int8 | p -> Int p` (also known as `widen`)

Notice that we have `widen` but not `narrow`. The latter is not as simple
because it requires that the refinement be compatible with `Int8`. A predicate
`p` that can be used with `Int8` if `p <: (>= -128 && <= 127)`. I prefer
to avoid introducing subtyping as a user-facing construct, but this is only
subtyping of predicates, not of types, so maybe it's a little less bad. The
type of `narrow` is:

    narrow : forpred p where p <: (>= -128 && <= 127). Int | p -> Int8 | p

Oh no. This is going to be awful for people to use. I need to do something
more simple. One alternative would be to only allow the predicate
`>= -128 && <= 127` for `Int8`. But this is not a great option. I really
like the idea of being able to store restricted numbers in an array of
8-bit words. One possibility is making `narrow` magic and only allowing
a fully monomorphic predicate. However, that would make something like
this impossible:

    attemptCrush : forpred p where p <: (>= -128 && <= 127).
      Array Int -> Maybe (Array (Int8 | p))

However, the fully general `attemptCrush` does not seem very useful, and
it must somehow attempt a runtime witness of the predicate. Let's move on.
Another concern about `Int8` is addition. How can it be typed? With `Int`,
we have:

    plus : Int | =n -> Int | =m -> Int | =n+m

With `Int8`, we do not really want a special `plus`. We want to upcast,
add, and then downcast again:

    addSmall :: Int8 | >=0 && <=10 -> Int8 | >=0 && <=15 -> Int8 | >=0 && <=25
    addSmall a b = narrow (plus (upcast a) (upcast b))

This works but only because the predicates are monomorphic. Also, in practice,
it should never be necessary to write such a function. All narrowing and
widening should happen "at the boundary". That is, right before writing to
an array or right after reading from an array. Normally, users should just
be working with `Int`. The narrow variants are just there so that arrays
work like they are expected to. 

Not mentioned earlier is that we want both signed and unsigned variants
of all the narrow types. This is not difficult, and it is useful.
