# Expression Language and Effect Language

[Compiling Standard ML to Java Bytecodes](https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.308.9811&rep=rep1&type=pdf)
is a great read. In Tackling the Awkward Squad, Peyton Jones references it
as an alternative for handling IO. Peyton Jones's scheme is the classic
"store transformer". All the IO functions take a bogus argument that is
threaded linearly through a programming. Tackling the Awkward Squad explains
a drawback to this that I won't go into here. It also mentions that linear
or uniqueness types (a la Clean) provide a different way to go about
this. Here, I want to propose a system that is somewhere between the
Haskell and the ML solution. In my mind, the biggest drawback of the ML
solution is that effectful and noneffectful expressions are treated as
though they were the same thing. The paper acknowledges this in section 5.

So how can we meet in the middle? What about three kinds of terms:

    V ::=           -- values
      | x, y, f     -- value variables
      | c           -- constants of base types (int, char, etc)
      | C V1 V2 ... -- constructor application
      | lam x. T    -- lambda abstraction
      | proc x. M   -- effectful lambda abstraction
    T ::=                -- pure expressions
      | val V            -- lift a value into an expression
      | let x = T1 in T2 -- evaluation, deferring possible
      | V1 V2            -- application, V1 : A -> B
      | case V of { C1 x -> T1; C2 y -> T2; ...} -- case on data
    M ::=                  -- effectful computation
      | eval x <= T  in M  -- force evaluation of expression, binding result
      | bind x <= M1 in M2 -- evaluation, strict ordering
      | V1 V2              -- application, V1 : A !-> B
      | case V of { C1 x -> M1; C2 y -> M2; ...} -- case on data

There is an implied type system not visible in this presentation. Notably,
there are two function arrows: one normal one and one for effectful things.
This means there are two lambdas. Examples of types:

    myNumber   :                Int
    pow        : (Int,Int)   -> Int
    sendStream : (Fd,Bytes) !-> Int
    getClock   : ()         !-> Int

An example of how application is typed:

    proc x. sendStream (1,x)
      :
    Bytes !-> Int

Alright, but what would the type of `sendStream (1,"hello")` be? There is
no way to prevents users from creating such a term. How about `Effect Int`?
That seems fine. And the `M1` in `bind` would need to be of type `Effect A`.
Essentially, we have several types:

    A
    A -> B
    A !-> B
    Effect A

And of course, compositions of these are acceptable. For example, a type like

    A !-> Effect B

indicates that an effectful function returns an effect. Let us consider the
difference between:

    A -> Effect B
    A !-> B

These are very nearly the same thing. In GHC, types like `A -> IO B` are normal.
What is the problem? Why not just copy GHC? GHC's `IO` is implemented as
a state transformer. Such an implementation implies that `A -> IO B` is a
function that takes two arguments: the `A` and the (invisible) state.
But we only want to take one argument. Let us consider the difference
between:

    proc x. sendStream (1,x)   :   Bytes !-> Int
    lam  x. sendStream (1,x)   :   Bytes -> Effect Int

The difference is subtle, but the second expression returns an effect (that
could be executed multiple times) that closes over `x`, printing it out
when executed. It is similar to the distinction in GHC between:

    \(b,s) -> sendStream ((1,b), s)
    \b -> \s -> sendStream ((1,b), s)

GHC makes these two expressions seem the same, but sometimes the difference
matter. Research the "GHC State Hack" for more information about this.

The bad thing about the proposed system is the duplication of
the `case` construct and of function application. The nice things is
that `let` and `eval` are distinguished. It is important to distinguish
these since the semantics are different. Deferring the computation of
`eval`'s argument is not generally possible since a loop or error would
prevent subsequent effects from happening.




