# Easy-to-Parse Grammars

I read about grammars and parsing last night. (Whatever I learned in undergrad,
I had definitely since forgotten it.) The classic parser tools Yacc and Bison
generate LALR parsers. Then there's ANTLR, which does LL(\*) parsers. There's
something going on with the grammars that can be recognized by these tools.
ANTLR needs an LL(k) grammar, and the LALR-parser generators need for the grammar
to be LR(1), I think. Regardless, all of these tools work by generating code
for you. Specifically, the LALR-parser generators need to create tables. These
tables are difficult to derive by hand, so most people use a tool instead.

One difficult with LL(k) grammars is that infix operators are tricky (or maybe
impossible). A workaround for this is to
[handle precedence parsing separately](https://www.reddit.com/r/ProgrammingLanguages/comments/3x2x2q/ll1_vs_operators/cy16iyf?utm_source=share&utm_medium=web2x).

My takeaway from all of this is that if I were every going to design a
programming language, I would try to make the grammar LL(1). This makes
it easy for someone to write a parser in any programming language rather
than using metaprogramming or code generation. Such a language might have
constructs that look like this:

    \x -> 42 + call foo(x * 2, y)

Having to use `call` is a little gross, but it's something worth thinking
about. Let's think about this a little more. It might be possible to get
right of the `call` keyword:

    define map : <a -> b, List a> -> List b
    as \<f,xs> -> case xs of
       { Nil -> Nil
       ; Cons <y,ys> -> cons<f y,map<f,xs>>
       }

The tuple thing is weird and makes this hard to read. Perhaps it is possible
to get away with something like this:

    define map(f : a -> b, xs : List a) : List b
    as case xs of
       { Nil -> nil
       ; Cons y ys -> cons(f y, map(f,xs))
       }

This has a more conventional syntax. It remove tuples. I am not sure exactly
what impact this has on the lambda-calculus-based IR. Note that the open
parenthesis, in the term-level language, is reserved to mean function
application. That is actually a problem, since most people want to use
parentheses for a different purpose.
