# Optimizing Garbage Collection for Dominators

In a runtime that disallows updates for certain classes of objects, is it
possible to improve worst-case GC times for large read-only data. To
clarify, this isn't something that could be done in GHC. The GHC runtime
admits updates in nearly all objects because of how laziness is implemented.
Here's the idea: consider a large tree-like structure (edges are directed):

        A
       / \
      B   \
     / \   \
    D   E   C
           / \
          F   G

If `A` is live, then all of the other nodes will be live. That is because
`A` is a dominator of this graph. Similarly, since `C` dominates `F` and `G`,
if `C` is live, then `F` and `G` will be live. These claims are true, not
just at a particular point in time, but forever. That is a consequence of
not having updates. If objects live in blocks, it might be possible to find
one or more dominators for the block. If the block dominator is live, then
all objects in the block could be considered live. The problem though, is
that being considered live is not enough to decide that something doesn't
need to be scanned. To avoid scanning (and relocation) entirely, we need
to know that

1. The block B is dominated by something live
2. Objects in block B either: (a) have no outgoing pointers or (b) have
   only pointers to dominated blocks by objects in B.

This is kind of tricky. I can envision an arrangement of nodes in a B-Tree
that implies that the root keeps all nodes in the tree live, but I'm not
sure how a runtime could figure this out. It seems like this might fit
well with a relocating three-stage generational GC. When copying from
the young generation to the middle generation, if you copy breath-first,
you could make it likely that all of the direct children of an object
end up on the same page. (Actually, depth-first might be better because it
would make dominated objects end up in the same block.) That's good because
it means that in sufficiently large trees, some blocks will certainly be
dominated by objects. But then there's the question of how to find the
dominators. Keep in mind that a block could be dominated by hundreds
of different objects. However, a garbage collector cannot record all
dominators. It would be prohibitively expensive to do this. Perhaps
a course-grained block-level dominance is the best option. That is,
only supporting the notion of an entire block's liveliness keeping a
subgraph of blocks live. This means that for a low-fan-out tree like
the one illustrated above, the root object probably wouldn't keep all
the subobjects live. The root might live on a block with other unrelated
objects. But there would be a block that contained a bunch of tree nodes,
and this block would dominate other blocks. We would need to first establish
the liveliness of every object in this block. However, a copying GC is
terrible at doing this since copying GC usually isn't even aware of all the
objects in a block. So this needs to be rethought.

Thinking about this more, there is a problem: How can a copying collector
tell if a block is dominated? It cannot know what objects live on the
block, so how does it know that all of them are reachable from some
object (or block)? Ah, but it can know! It learns while copying into
the block, not by scanning. When we copy objects into the block, we can
see the parent chain. The tricky thing is how to figure out if everything
copied into a block shares a parent. This seems like it could be expensive,
and the objects might share more than one parent. Also, depending on how
you arrived at the object, the parent chain might look different. That is,
it's nondeterministic which parent chain you get. But I must admit, I do
like this approach. It seems simple and tractable. I just don't yet see
a cheap way to take the intersection of the parent chains.
