# Arrows for Local Mutation

It is well-known that local mutation can be handled with this trick:

    ST : Token -> Type
    runST : (forall token. ST token a) -> a
    newSTRef : a -> ST (STRef token a)
    writeSTRef : STRef token a -> a -> ST token ()

Are there ways to restrict local mutation without requiring higher-rank types?
It might be possible with an arrow-like interface. Here it is:

    Effect : Type -> Type -> Action
    Ref : Type -> MutType
    Array : Type -> MutType
    run : forall (a : Type) (b : Type). Effect a b -> (a -> b)
    newRef : Effect a (Ref a)
    writeRef : Effect (Ref a, a) (Ref a)
    readArray : Effect (Array a, Int) a
    loop : Effect (b,d) (c,Maybe d) -> Effect b c
    caseMaybe : Effect () r -> Effect a r -> Effect (Maybe a) r

The main idea here is that nothing mutable can pass through `run`. In addition
to addressing scoping problems, this makes it possible to avoid the need
to thread a state token around explicitly in the core IR. The plan is that
every effectful action would be expressed a syntax tree. There may be a problem.
What about expressions lke:

    foo : Int -> Effect () Foo

Here, the integer argument can not impact the shape of the computation, but
it might be used in the computation. So maybe it is alright. Let's try this
out to see how it might be used:

    modify : Effect (MutMap k v, k, Effect v v) (MutMap k v)

An important question is "is it possible to pass an Effect as an argument to
an Effect". I believe that it is but that the inner effect could not reference
anything dangerous. That is, it must be constructed at the top level.

This all seems rather tedious though, and it would require a lot of desugaring
to make the user-facing syntax palatable. A monadic interface requires very
little desugaring and is more expressive. Perhaps the desugaring burden could
be reduced by adding a let-like construct. This will have to be described
differently since it leaves the realm of syntax trees:

    Effect : MutType -> MutType -> Action
    replace : (k,v) -> Effect (MutMap k v, MutMap k v)
    myEffect : (Int,Bool) -> Effect (MutMap Int Word, Word) (MutMap Int Word)
    myEffect (n,shouldReplace) = proc (original,v) -> do
      let y = n + 1
      case {immutable} shouldReplace of
        False -> replace y -< (original,v)
        True -> modify y -< (original,incrementBy v)

To be honest, this feels like it is getting close to Atkey's monad-in-a-monad
from the [Key Monad paper](https://people.kth.se/~buiras/publications/KeyMonadHaskell2016.pdf).
Maybe that is the right direction to take. Let's take a look at relative
monads:

    class RelativeMonad m v where
      rreturn :: v x → m x
      (·>>=) :: m x → (v x → m y) → m y

But as I'm revisiting the paper, I can see that Atkey's entire presentation
hinges upon the availability of higher-rank types. The arrow-based approach
can avoid higher-rank types, but, even allowing unrestricted use of let-bound
variable, it still requires considerable help with desugaring. Maybe this
could be ameliorated by just allowing mutable fields to be reused as well.
The problem is that we need to prevent fields from one proc from sneaking
into a nested one. An approach with more desugaring prevents this because
there is simply no way to get the mutable value to pass that boundary. But
once we can freely reference things, we are back at the same problem.

I feel like this just does not really work. Sad.
