# Simply-Typed Core Language Without Lambda

I'm thinking about an IR for after closure conversion and lambda lifting.
There is no polymorphism, and there are no closures. At this stage, the
type system would distinguish runtime representation of values. All boxed
values would have the same type. Consider an expression from the
source language:

    scramble : Int -> Int
    fold : <(<b, a> -> b), b, List a> -> b
    foo : <Int,List Int> -> Int
    foo <y,xs> =
      let z = scramble y
       in fold (\<acc,x> -> mix x z + acc) 0 xs

After closure conversion and lambda lifting, we have something like this:

    scramble : Int -> Int
    fold[Int][Int] : <Function[<Int, Int>][Int], Int, Box> -> Int
    data Function[<Int,Int>][Int]
      = MkLamFoo Int
    foo : <Int,Box> -> Int
    foo <y,xs> =
      let z = scramble y
      let f = alloc MkLamFoo z
      let args = <f,0,xs>
       in fold[Int][Int] args

How does type checking work in such a language? I'm pretty sure that since
the leaves always have types and there is no polymorphism, it should be
possible to infer the type of any expression (or decide that it is ill-typed).
That is, to typecheck `foo`, we need only synthesize the type of its body and
then confirm that this type matches result type. Easy.

One unrelated question is what to do about unboxed tuples and sums. When
lowering this (to LLVM or anything else), unboxed tuples should probably
expanded. For sums, it is less obvious what to do, but as part of some
pass, it probably makes sense to convert those into tuples with bogus 
components accessible.

# The Representation Kinds of Tuples

What representation kinds should tuples have? In GHC, unboxed tuples have
kinds like this:

    <5,<False,12>> : TYPE (TupleRep [IntRep,TupleRep [BoxedRep,IntRep]])
    <<5,False>,12> : TYPE (TupleRep [TupleRep [BoxedRep,IntRep],IntRep])

It's a little weird, but things with identical representations can end
up with different kinds. In GHC, this doesn't really matter because
representation polymorphism has onerous restrictions attached to it.
However, in a language that compiles representation-polymorphic functions
using specialization, it starts to matter a little more. In such a
language, we would want the two tuples above to have the same kind
because that would lead to fewer specializations of functions. For
tuples, we want some kind of flatten and a bag. That is, we have:

    5 : TYPE IntRep
    <a,b> : TYPE (Union ra rb)
    <Int,<Bool,Int>> : TYPE {IntRep,IntRep,BoxedRep}

If inference is suitably restricted, then only `Union` and `Singleton`
should be needed (no `Delete`, `Intersect`, or `Subtract`). Perhaps
rather than having these representation bags be user-facing, we could
just accomplish the same thing by normalizating tuples in a core-to-core
pass. This involves:

1. Flattening tuples out to one level
2. Putting fields in a canonical order based on their kind

This might be more simple.

# Typed IR for Complete and Easy

One problem with Complete and Easy is that there is no typed target
language. With Hindley-Milner, it is possible to compile to System F,
Then subsequent optimizations can be typechecked. With Complete and
Easy, it is not possible to compile to System F without sometimes
expanding `f` to `\x -> f x`. So what could a type-annotated result
of Complete and Easy look like? For one, subsumption needs to be
explicitly represented. Think of the way that GHC has casts. Basically
that but they would be used for polymorpishm instead of for newtypes.
And then there is the issue of bringing type variables into scope.
Complete and Easy does not provide a way to do this in the syntax for
terms. Terms cannot have annotation that refer to quantified type
variables because type variables cannot be scoped like that. In the
target language, this needs to be possible. In particular, any time we
write `\x -> ...`, we really need for `x` to be annotated with a type.

Perhaps is it possible to bring type variables into scope only when `∀I`
happens. That is, elaborate a term like this:

    (\x -> Unit) : (forall a. a -> Unit)

To something like this:

    (/\a. (\(x : a) -> Unit))

The type of the expression can now always be inferred. However, notice
than, unlike System F, we do not apply this expression to a type argument
for instantiation. Instead, we use a cast:

    cast (/\a. (\(x : a) -> Unit)) (Proof of: (forall b. b -> Unit) <: (Int -> Unit))

The "Proof of: ..." part is built from the algorithmic subtyping rules in
Complete and Easy. Successive casts can always be composed (and probably
should be). Do we really want to drag these proofs around everywhere?
I think so. What about simplifications like inlining the lambda into
an application site? Something like this:

    apply
      (cast (/\a. (\(x : a) -> Unit)) (Proof of: (forall b. b -> Unit) <: (Int -> Unit)))
      42

This should certainly get reduced to `Unit`. But how? We should be able to
move the argument 42 into the lambda, replace all occurrences of `x`. We
should then be left with:

      (cast (/\a. Unit) (Proof of: (forall b. Unit) <: Unit))

There is a little bit of hand waving going on concerning the new proof term,
but let's just accept it will be possible to delete the arrow and the argument.
This is a somewhat awkward spot to be in. Technically, this result is correct.
However, it would behoove us to remove both the no-longer-used `a` type variable
and the cast. This would clean things up, making the IR a little more readable.
I am not sure how to detect, in the general case, when this should be done.
