# Functional Programming Without Closures

Functional programming is cool, and higher-order functional are important.
For example, folds and traversals are terse and elegant ways to capture
common ways of reducing lists. However, in these cases, we do not want the
compiler to actually pass the closure to a function. In GHC Haskell, the
standard library has compiler hints that ensure that `foldr`, `map`, and
similar functions are always inlined. This is not behavior that is always
desirable, and passing around closures, storing them inside of data types,
and returning them from functions is an elegant solution to certain problems.
However, in practice, I find that I seldom need this. That is, my higher-order
functions are nearly always this that I just want inlined. This suggests
that some sort of macro system (or metaprogramming), may be appropriate.
MetaML, based on modal logic, explores this but is a dead project. I have
a vague sketch of a different system. It is probably not sound, but I
thought I'd get it written down somewhere in case I ever come back to it.

What would the typing rules for a functional language without closures
look like? Well, if data and functions are supposed to be treated
differently, they had better have different kinds. Let's try:

    data Kind = Code | Data
    type Int : Data
    type (Int -> Int) : Code
    type (a -> b -> b) -> (b,List a) -> b : Code -- uncurried right fold over lists

This does not feel quite right though. Why? What about a function that
is supposed to select a function based on a value:

    picker : Foo -> (Int -> Int)

We cannot use `picker`. It takes data that might have been provided at
runtime and gives you a function that cannot be passed around at compile time.
Let's try a different system:

    Kind = natural numbers

    a : X   b : X
    ---------------
    (a -> b) : X+1

Requiring the level to match is a little suspect, and also princial types feel
like they might be in danger, although I'm not totally sure. Now, however, there
is now a sane type of `picker`:

    picker : forall n. (Foo : n+1) -> ((Int : n) -> (Int : n))

This means that `picker` only accepts an argument that is available at
compile time. Level 0 is runtime values, and all higher levels are
values known at compile time. Also, level 1 is for functions that
can be compiled. Let's try coming up with a type signature of `foldr`:

    foldr : forall n. (((a,b):n -> b:n),b:n+1) -> ((b,List a):n -> b:n)
                      ----- kinded n+1 -------    ---- kinded n+1 -----
                      ------------------ kinded n+2 -------------------

So, if we set `n` to 0, we can do something like this:

    sum : (Number,List Number):0 -> Number:0
    sum = foldr {0} ((\(x,y) -> x + y),0)

Since the type of `sum` has kind 1, it may be compiled. That is, it does not
have to be inlined everywhere. Notice above that the type of numeric literals
is not `Int:0` but `Int:n`. Any data constructor would work this same way.

I do not actually know if this technique scales up to more complicated things.
It might, but it might not. Uncurrying functions is really important when
doing this. Think about what the type of the uncurried version of `foldr`
would have looked like. Not good.

There are several questions I've not thought hard about. Any of these could
pose a serious problem:

* What happens when functions close over values? Something at level n+1
  must not be allowed to close over something at level n. How can this
  be prevented? It's tempting to just disallow closing over an environment.
  This feels like a bad restriction, but maybe it would work.
* How to do fixed points? I don't think this should be a huge issue, but
  I've not thought through whether or not there are issues with the
  standard `fix` extension.
* What about data types with functions? For example:
  `data Foo = FooC Int (Bool -> Char)`. I think this is alright, but
  `Foo` always has a non-zero kind.
