# Dynamic Nursery Sizing

There's a 2015 TFP submission called
[Kindergarten Cop: Dynamic Nursery Resizingfor GHC](ftp://ftp-sop.inria.fr/indes/TFP15/TFP2015_submission_7.pdf).
It has some cool ideas for improving the performance of dynamic nursery
sizing. In section 4.3, the authors propose a novel algorithm that
works by measuring how long it the mutator and the garbage collector
take to run (one complete cycle of filling up the nursery and GCing it)
and then trying to compute what nursery-size-to-live-set ratio minimizes
that number.

This is an interesting approach. There's a part of me that really like
that it takes some kind of monotonic clock into consideration. This seems
like a good heuristic. The paper, however, does not discuss running a
multithreaded program on an SMP. Since GHC's collection is stop-the-world,
it seems like it should be possible to try out the algorithms in a
multithreaded setting. It would be interesting to see the results.

What about, hypothetically, a runtime without a stop-the-world collector?
Linux has `CLOCK_THREAD_CPUTIME_ID`, which makes it possible to measure
just the time spent by a single thread. So each thread could attempt to
compute its own nursery-size-to-live-set ratio. But I wonder if its
possible that what happens to be best for an individual thread might be
bad for the process as a whole. I'm not sure if this would happen in
practice. The scenario I'm thinking of is that a thread decides
that a 1MB nursery is best for itself (at some live set size), but really,
everything actually goes out of scope quickly, and the difference between
the 1MB nursery and a 128KB nursery is small. Claiming a large nursery
could adversely impact performance on other cores that share a memory
cache. Also, there's a question of "what counts as my live set?" In
a multithreaded setting, threads commonly share data in an older
generation.

I wonder if measuring the percentage of the nursery copied out would
work. If a nursery collection has to copy 50% of the nursery, you
almost certainly want a bigger nursery. If it copies 0%, you could
probably do with a smaller nursery. I don't know what the sweet
spot would be. It would be cool to have an algorithm that tries to
keep this number at a certain percent (maybe between 1% and 5%
for an immutable-by-default language). 

Actually, now that I think about it more, the numbers from the paper
were:

    GC configuration Speedup
    ------+-----------------
    -A2m  |  1.44
    -A8m  |  1.69
    -A64m |  1.78
    -H    |  1.38
    TAA   |  1.72
    TAA+  |  1.79
    SLR   |  1.96

The vanilla TAA algorithm did pretty well, and TAA only measures time
to collect the nursery. Minimizing nursery collection time is nearly
the same thing as minimizing the number of bytes copied. The amount
of time of time a copying GC takes is correlated with the amount of
data that must be copied. I wonder if there's a variant on TAA that
checks for bytes copied instead.

