# Join Points for Pure Error Throwing 

The GHC Join Points paper presents a restriction on the use of
join points:

> For jumps to truly be compiled as mere jumps, they must not occur
> in any subterm whose evaluation will take place in some unknown context.
> Otherwise, the jump would leave the stack in an unknown state.

A consequence of this  is that preexisting join points cannot show up in
any term passed to a function. The paper devises a type system that enforces
this. For example, `VBIND` establishes that in `let x = u in e`, you can jump
to an in-scope join point inside of `e` but not inside of `u`. I believe that
this is to prevent constructs like:

    let x = ... jump y z ...
     in f x

In a lazy language like Haskell, such a construction would subvert the
invariant that `APP` tries to establish. That is, `x` might be a thunk, and
then any evaluation context is lost once control transfers over to `f`.
In a strict language, this might actually be alright since the jump, if it
were happening at all, would happen before `f` was called. I'm not totally sure.
The paper says that join points are a little different in a call-by-value
language but does not clarify how they are different:

> Although we have presented Fj as a lazy language, everything in this paper
> applies equally to a call-by-value language. All one needs to do is to
> change the evaluation context,the notion of what is substitutable, and
> a few typing rules.

What if we wanted to be able to reify join points and pass them around more
freely. What would that require? Let's consider what kind of code we
want to generate. GHC-style join points are intended to produce jumps
to statically known offsets. What I'm thinking about is something more
akin to C++ try-throw-catch. The big difference is that I do not care
about destructors. That is, I don't want to unwind the stack. I was
want to jump right to the error-handling spot like C's `longjmp` does.
Using this interface might look like this:

    foo : Bar
    foo = withLongJumpTarget
      having { target (x : MyErr) = ... -- return type Bar }
      run { \target -> bar target 55 -- return type Bar }
    bar : JumpTarget MyErr -> Int -> Bar
    bar target n = case n of
      13 -> jump target MyErrThirteenBad
      _ -> ...

Crucially, `target` must not escape. It must not escape the whole business
of jumping back up to an earlier stack frame only works when you haven't
gone back past that frame already. Something that is not clear to me
here is what syntactic restriction there should be around where `jump`
happens. With GHC's join points, `jump` cannot show up in a unknown context.
However, if `jump` is backed by `longjmp`, then it should be able to show
up anywhere.
