# Variance by Kinds

One problem with subtyping is that is interacts somewhat poorly with mutation.
I had been wondering how the type system from
[Complete and Easy Bidirectional Typecheckingfor Higher-Rank Polymorphism](https://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/~nk480/bidir.pdf)
could be extended to support mutable references. What if we added type
constructors and a kind system *without* adding kind variables? For
example:

    Kind = Immutable | Mutable | Kind -> Kind
    Int : Immutable
    Bool : Immutable
    Ref : Immutable -> Mutable
    MutableArray : Immutable -> Mutable
    Array : Immutable -> Immutable

Let's look at the `DeclSub` rule from the paper:

    Ψ e ⇒ A   Ψ A ≤ B
    -----------------  DeclSub
         Ψ e ⇐ B

What this says is that if we have some expression `e` that synthesizes
type `A` and `A` is a subtype of `B`, `e` typechecks against type `B`.
So if `e` synthesizes type `Int`, then `e` typechecks against types
like `∀ x. Int`. How does this interact with mutable references? I
think that it's actually fine. Mutable references could be treated
just like any other type constructor that is covariant in its arguments.
From a [github issue](https://github.com/ollef/Bidirectional/issues/5#issuecomment-646626749):

    Ψ A1 ≤ B1    Ψ A2 ≤ B2
    ----------------------
        Ψ A1 A2 ≤ B1 B2

This works even for mutable references, but I think it only works
because quantifiers inside type applications are not allowed
(e.g. you cannot write `Ref (∀ x. x)`). The subtyping relationship
we get is `∀ x. Ref x ≤ Ref Int`, and I think that is sound, but
I'm just guessing, and I won't bother to look into it any further
at the moment.

When we add refinement types, mutable references get harder.
Mutable references are essentially invariant in their arguments, and
their argument type is treated covariantly or contravariantly depending
on whether read on write is being performed. For example:

    -- Here, X :- Y means X refines Y
    read : ∀ a (p :- a) (q :- a) (p < q). Ref p -> IO q
    write : ∀ a (p :- a) (q :- a) (p < q). Ref q -> p -> IO ()

If we have a mutable integer where the integer is refined by some predicate
that declares that it must be less than 50, then we can read out a number
that is less than 60, but we cannot write such a number to the reference.
This introduces a lot of type variables. I was hoping that somehow a
kinding system would let us avoid this, but it will not. Anything
built on top of `read` or `write` may end up needing to expose such
a predicate ordering to the end user. Although this makes sense, it's
a terrible user interface. The end goal is to be able to write functions
like:

    index : ∀ n a. (Array a){len=n} -> Int{_<n} -> a

Let's try again:

    read : Ref p -> IO p
    write : Ref p -> p -> IO ()

Does this work? Kind of. I think `read` is just as powerful as it was before,
but what about `write`? In fact, `write` also works the same way that it
did before since the `p` argument appears to the left of the arrow. So,
the simple types are the correct types. This might cause a problem with
problem with principal types, but maybe not. The `Ref p` itself does not
participate in any subsumption relationship.

One idea is that perhaps type variables are never refined. They could
only be refined be a variable predicate after all. But we have to be
able to distinguish between the two:

    map : (a{} -> b{}) -> List a{} -> List b{}
    id : a -> a

This is rather painful for what I am actually trying to accomplish. All
I really want is to be able to refine integers and arrays. But that seems
to spill into everything else. The interaction with mutable references is
an unavoidable difficulty. I wonder if it is possible to simply require
that all mutable references are explicitly typed. I don't know if
Complete and Easy would break if this were added.

The invariance of `Ref` is a pain. There's a part of me that wants
to say "use uniqueness types instead", and then everything could be
covariant, but Complete and Easy doesn't work with a uniqueness type
system, and additionally, uniqueness types don't actually work very
well for mutation.

My conclusion is that refinement types will not fit into this framework
well. Bummer.
