# Currying, System F Omega, and Array Primitives

What should the primitives for array indexing look like? In GHC, the array
primops are all marked as `can_fail` so that they do not get floated out.
Of course, `can_fail` is a bit of a hack, something that isn't reflected in
the types. What if these functions accepted evidence of that the index was
in bounds. Then then could be floated, just not floated up past the place
where the evidence came into scope, and this is exactly what we should
expect. Let's assume that dependent types are not available. Written as
some unholy matrimony of syntaxes (uncurried, angle brackets mean tuple):

    Kind = * | NatK | Kind -> Kind

    Array : <NatK,*> -> *
    NatT : NatK -> *
    LessThan : <NatK,NatK> -> *

    index : ∀ (n : NatK)
         -> ∀ (a : *)
         -> ∀ (i : NatK)
         ->   <Array <n,a>, NatT i, LessThan <i,n>>
         ->   a

Not bad. I didn't tuple up the type arguments because it would make this
more difficult to read, but it is possible. See chapter 22 of Bob Harper's
Practical Foundations for Programming Languages for more on that topic.
Notice that above, we assume GHC-style type erasure, which leads to the
need for `NatT`. There are ways to avoid this. See Richard Eisenberg's
Dependent Types in Haskell: Theory and Practice. Also, Idris 2 uses
Connor McBride's I Got Plenty o' Nuttin'. As someone from a background
in industry, I find Atkey's Syntax and Semantics of Quantitative Type
Theory a slightly more readable presentation of the same ideas.
However, any of these get in the way of tupling up arguments. Let's
looks at some other approaches. Tupled type arguments:

    index : ∀ (x : <NatK, *, NatK>)
         ->   <Array <x.1,x.2>, NatT x.3, LessThan <x.3,x.1>>
         ->   x.2

That's pretty gross. Let's try Idris 2:

    index : (0 n : NatK)
         -> (0 a : *)
         ->        Array <n,a>
         -> (  i : NatK)
         -> (0 _ : LessThan <i,n>)
         -> a

Pretty cool. This removes `NatT`. Let's try other stuff. What about
a `write` function? Let's use uniqueness types as described in Uniqueness
Typing Simplified by Edsko de Vries, Rinus Plasmeijer, and David M. Abrahamson:

    write : ∀ (n : NatK)
         -> ∀ (a : *)
         -> ∀ (i : NatK)
         -> ∀ (u : Uniquness)
         ->   Attr <Attr (Array <n,a>) Unique, Attr (NatT i) Nonunique, Attr (LessThan <i,n>) Nonunique> Unique
         ->   Attr Array<n,a> u

But we've left any mention of uniqueness off of `a`. I'll have to come back to
this idea later.
