# Garbage Collection and Tagging

In runtimes that support garbage collection, it is common to tag heap objects
with information about how to interpret the bytes. There appears to have been
some interest in the early 1990s around GC without tags. I have encountered:

* [Incremental Garbage Collection Without Tags](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/3-540-55253-7_12.pdf) by Benjamin Goldberg.
* [Tag-free Garbage Collection Using Explicit Type Parameters](https://www.cs.tufts.edu/~nr/cs257/archive/andrew-tolmach/tag-free-gc.pdf) by Andrew Tolmach.
* [Polymorphic Type Reconstruction for Garbage Collection without Tags](https://3e8.org/pub/scheme/doc/lisp-pointers/v5i1/p53-goldberg.pdf)
  by Benjamin Goldberg and Michael Gloger.

However, interest in tagless GC appears to have waned. Both GHC and OCaml
install a tag in every heap object. I am not exactly sure why tagless GC didn't
pick up more steam in the (rather strongly typed) functional programming
world. One suspicion I have is that [Cheney's algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cheney%27s_algorithm),
the classic stop-and-copy GC algorithm, requires that all heap objects have
extra space for a forwarding pointer. Similarly, mark-and-sweep requires
a bit in every heap object to mark objects as live during the mark phase.
(And adding even one bit pushes you toward adding a machine word.) Since
both Cheney and mark-and-sweep ask for extra space, and they do so in such
a way that the space can be shared/reused for a tag, anyone using either
algorithm for GC might as well use tags, given that the tags don't actually
cost any additional storage. Again, this is entirely conjecture.

# Runtime Memory Layout in OCaml

OCaml does an excellent job documenting the [memory representation of values](https://dev.realworldocaml.org/runtime-memory-layout.html).
I'm already familiar with how GHC represents values, and the contrast
between the two systems is interesting. Notably, OCaml has some magic
for machine integers that uses a bit to distinguish them from pointers.
OCaml does not appear to do any tagging of pointers like GHC does.

# Cheney's Algorithm and Slicing During GC

See the entry from 2020-08-07. How can Cheney's algorithm be adapted
to support slicing during GC? Cheney needs space in every heap object
for a forwarding pointer, but what if we added even more extra fields
to arrays? Two more fields: minimum offset and maximum offset. We need
something like this:

* Constructor Tag/Forwarding Pointer (63 bits)
* Visited (1 bit)
* Minimum offset (32 bits)
* Maximum offset (32 bits)

When an array is created, `visited` is set to `false`. During GC, the
first time an array is visited, we set visited to `true` and set minimum
and maximum to the offsets implied by the slice that referenced the
array. On subsequent visits during the same collection, the minimum and
maximum are compared with those that the referencing slice implies and
updated if needed. At the end, we would need to reset all the `visited`
values to `false`. There's some trick that mark-and-sweep uses where if
you use two bits instead, you don't actually have to reset everything at
the end. I think that could be adapted here.

But wait! This doesn't actually work! We must copy the array the first
time we see it, and we do not learn about the minimal slice until after
copying it. We really want to be updating the offsets on the copy in the
to-space so that in a future GC, when it is copied again, we get the
slicing we want. This way, it works, but we just have to wait a while
for it to work. If we add aging to Cheney's algorithm, then we can
actually get this to work even better. Every time an object ages, we
can update the minimum/maximum offset in place. Then, by the first time
we copy it, the slice information is more accurate.

This optimization extends to both arrays of pointers and arrays of
non-pointers. I do not know if there are any other settings where
something similar would be useful.
