# Functional Programming Languages

This is a collection of thoughts I've had over the last few days about
functional programming languages. I wanted to write this down so that
I don't forget my conclusions.

* Uniqueness types are a bad bet. I have not been able to find any good
  insights into the type theory around data structures with pointers.
  For example: arrays of GC-managed objects.
* Pervasive regions are mostly a bad bet. You have to give up on functional
  programming to make these work. You have to think about when a data
  constructor application will allocate. A duplicated allocation can
  permanently waste memory. The nice thing about regions is that you
  can do mutation without having the "new generation pointing to old
  generation" problem. Additionally, regions seem more appropriate for
  managing large off-heap structures than uniqueness types. Also, I
  think there might be decent options for freezing a region, but I'm
  not totally. This could be useful for building a map from a list.
  Writing the map-building function in an imperitive fashion seems
  like an acceptable trade to make. Building arrays might always
  require use of a region. This might be a problem.
* Pointer tagging seems like a good optimization. V8 even combines this
  with pointer compression. It only allows 4GB of objects to live on
  the heap, but that's not bad. It requires a dedicated register for
  a base address (unless you want to JIT after mmap, eww...). There
  is a [good writeup](https://v8.dev/blog/pointer-compression) on
  V8's website.
* I cannot figure out a clever way to use sigsegv or userfaultfd to
  reduce the bookkeeping code needed to check for reaching the end
  of the heap in a bump allocator. The problem is that GC roots could
  be in registers. Even worse, low-level optimizations mean that it's
  possible that a GC root might even be synthesized by combining two
  registers. There are two workarounds I've come up with, but they both
  seem like bad ideas:
  - Always write every heap allocation to the stack. I'm not even sure
    if this even works.
  - Do not perform heap checks on every allocation. Only do them in
    places where you do not need to push things onto the stack. This
    is bad because it might cause the nursery to never get garbage
    collected.
  The goal here is to avoid the instruction bloat. The branch is
  easily predicted. It would just be nice not to have several stores
  bloating the generated assembly.
* Strict-by-default with non-uniform representations (i.e. unboxed Int)
  seems like a huge win. No one has really been able to get this right.
  Most functional programming languages out there give you boxed ints
  and then make you rely on optimization for these to get unboxed. Rust
  does offer this, but it isn't garbage collected and lacks referentially
  transparent. If you do this, you need a kind system, and you need a
  way to guarantee that certain things can be inlined. Code generation
  for functions with levity polymorphic arguments is not possible.
* I am intrigued by the idea of banning runtime closures. This means
  separating arrow from data with the kind system since we could not
  put functions inside of a list anymore. Runtime closures are seldom
  desirable, and I do not think that they result in good assembly for
  the machine to execute. It is better to know where you are jumping
  so that speculative execution works.
* Nursery GC can be made concurrent if mutation is banned.
  Not just user-facing mutation, any heap mutation used even as an
  implementation detail. For example, GHC's thunks get overridden once
  they are evaluated. This means that old generations can point into
  newer generations. This is a problem for concurrent collection of
  nurseries since collection of the nursery may involve updating
  a pointer in an older generation. Something else could be concurrently
  reading from that pointer. In fact, maybe they already did, and now
  they have an address in the nursery you are collecting. And now
  you have to go update that other nursery, and you're going to
  stop the world. Back to the original claim: if there's no mutation,
  there's no problem anymore. The guarantee we need is that the only pointers
  into the nursery are either (a) themselves in the nursery or (b) pointers
  that live on the stack.
* Can we live without `IORef` and `MVar`? The region-based variants of
  these require the payload to be allocated in the same region. That
  might be a problem because it requires extra copying. But maybe it
  doesn't really matter. Maybe we could keep non-region-based `IORef`
  and `MVar` but writing to them would immidiately copy the payload
  to an older generation. Or maybe it could immidiately promote the
  copied data, updating relevant pointers in the nursery. In this scheme,
  writes to mutable variables become more expensive. I need to come up
  with a list of common uses of `IORef` in Haskell. That would help
  me think about this better.
  

