# Merchants of Debt

There's a lot of talk about premature optimization in every programming
language community. It transcends language, and it is dangerous. It is a
grievous sin, and I still often find myself captive to it. Consequently,
I cannot lecture anyone on this topic.

However, there's something else I'd like to discuss: premature abstraction.
On this topic, I feel more comfortable speaking up. I don't prematurely
abstract (not often at least) any more. Like any language, Haskell affords
plenty of opportunity to invent abstractions that do not pay their way.
However, unlike many other languages, Haskell makes it possible to implement
clever abstractions that have the illusion of paying their way but in practice
are typically conceptual (and sometimes runtime) overhead.

Before I describe what's good and what's bad, I want to revisit the old idea
of design patterns. I'm going to define design patterns to mean patterns
that are not captured by an abstractions in programming languages themselves.
That is, *design pattern* implies some amount of redundancy, some level of
"I'm writing almost the same code I've written before". By contrast, I'll
use the term *abstraction* to mean doing something in a programming language
factors out that similar code.

Let's start with good abstraction. Possibly the greatest abstraction is
parametric polymorphic. An implementation of a list or a map should make
it possible to use anything as the element type.

What is bad abstraction? Finish this.
