# One Traversal to Rule Them All (or Most of Them)

I wrote about this on in the entry on 2021-01-29, but I revisit this. At the time,
I identified three examples of things that are important to do in a `foreach` statement:

1. Jumping out of `foreach` with undetermined order
2. Mapping to one or more target vectors (writes not explicit)
3. Commutative monoidal accumulators

I think I've soured on supporting jumps with unspecified order. Here an updated list of what
I think is important:

1. Jumping out of `foreach` (disables vectorization)
2. Accumulator (disables vectorization)
3. Mapping to one or more target vectors (writes not explicit)
4. Dropping elements, filtering, one or more targets (probably disables vectorization)
5. Commutative monoidal accumulators (addition, multiplication)
6. Associative monoidal accumulators (min, max)
7. Associative short-circuiting monoidal accumulators (first, last, any, all)
8. Control over iteration order (ascending, descending)

The structure of a loop would be:

    foreach (acc1 = A,acc2 = B,e1 <- src1,e2 <- src2,ix):
      prologue => :
        x = ...
      body => :
        (accA,accB,r1,out1,out2)
      epilogue(acc1,acc2,dst1,out1,out2) => :
        ...
 
The *prologue* is a special section of let bindings that only gets executed if the loop runs
for one or more iterations. It is important to be able to express this kind of laziness in
a language that is otherwise strict. Also, this kind of laziness is essentially free since
for loops are typically compiled to an assembly sequence that begins with a check that the
length is greater than zero.

The *epilogue* is what to do after the loop finishes. Here, any new arrays become available.
Also, the monoidal output becomes available. And the state is available.

We need a way to control the iteration order of both input and output arrays. The only
options are ascending and descending. Ascending is more common, but a descending order
lets us process arrays backwards. This is needed when reversing arrays.

One other catch: this is a control flow construct. It is a lot like a case statement.
For example, one might write:

    x = myExpr
    foreach (e1 <- src1):
      prologue => ...
      body => ...
      epilogue(dst) => :
        MyDataCon{name: x, children: dst}

Another way to write this same program is:

    MyDataCon:
      name => myExpr
      children => foreach (e1 <- src1):
        prologue => ...
        body => ...
        epilogue(dst) => dst

The desired lowering of this involves allocating space for `MyDataCon` and
building `dst` directly into it. It's unsettling that there are two ways
to write this. I think that the canonical form should be the first one.
The second one cannot be used when you want to bail out by jumping to a
join point.

Let's think about the syntax a little more. How about:

    for (len)(ix)(asc e1 <- src1,desc e2 <- src2)(acc1 = A,acc2 = B)(asc Int)(sum,product): 
      prologue => :
        x = ...
      body => :
        continue(accA,accB)(r1)(out1,out2)
      epilogue(acc1,acc2)(dst1)(out1,out2) => :
        ...

We only need `len` and not an initial offset because offsets are built into
the array types.
