# Proofs with Numbers

Here's a system for dealing with proofs that involve numbers:

    Lte : Int -> Int -> Proof
    (+) : Int -> Int -> Int     // commutativity built in
    const : a -> b -> Lte a b   // a and b must be literals
    trans : Lte a b -> Lte b c -> Lte a c
    add   : Lte a b -> Lte c d -> Lte (a + c) (b + d)
    incr  : a -> Lte b c -> Lte (a + b) (a + c)

To prove that `x <= x + 1`:

    incr x (const 0 1)

What about equality? It could be handled the same way, but the result is
often unpleasant for the user. A common use for equality is substitution.
For example:

    subst : Eq a b -> Lte a c -> Lte b c

Having to do this is tedious, and it gets worse when the term you are
trying to substitute is burried inside of something. Consider substituting
`x` for an equivalent term in an expression like this:

    Lte (x * y + x * z) 100

One neat property of GHC's type system is that type equalities flow freely
through programs. I think it is something worth trying to imitate. In the
above example, suppose that we knew that `x = k + 5`. The above should
then check as any of these (assuming that distribution is automatic):

    Lte (k * y + 5 * y + k * z + 5 * z) 100
    Lte (x * y + k * z + 5 * z) 100
    Lte (k * y + 5 * y + x * z) 100

I'm not sure if there is an efficient way to perform this check. One
inefficient option is to just try all known equalities involving any
of the relevant variables. I think this should only happen during
checking, not during synthesis, and the user should not have the
ability to perform this substitution explicitly.

How could this system be represented?

    data Lte
      = Const Int Int
      | Trans Lte Lte
      | Add Lte Lte
      | Incr Atom Lte
    data Atom = Var VarId | Lit Int 
    type Expr = Map Int (Bag VarId) -- sum of products with coefficient

This representation has the lousy property that the user cannot actually
tell what two expressions `Lte` is comparing without walking it completely.
But maybe that works out alright since the expressions would probably
be stored in record fields right next to the `Lte` in an implementation
that actually used this.

Let's go a little bit further. How about adding disjunction:
 
    data Predicate = Disjunction (Set Predicate)

Conjunction is unlikely to be needed since predicates are passed around
as values. Disjunction, however, is occassionally important. Consider:

    y <= x OR x <= y

We need to be able to establish that this is trivially true. Since testing
expressions for equality is doable, it might just be possible to perform
this reduction without the user having to guide it. For the most part
though, disjunction is not terribly useful. Knowing that one of two things
is true is nearly always useless since you then have to test the predicates
anyway.

By antisymmetry, we have:

    a <= b AND b <= a  ==>  a = b

This would need to be invoked explicitly as:

    antisym : Lte a b -> Lte b a -> Eq a b

I'm not sure if `a` and `b` can be omitted. 
