# Answers to Questions

On 2022-12-07, I wrote down some questions that I wanted to answer.
Here are the answers I've come up with:

* Figure out if it is possible to get rid of annotations. Answer: No.
  When lowering ANF to blocks, it is critical that we have a precomputed
  use annotation available at each step. I've played around with the
  idea of doing register selection way down at the leaves and then
  propogating that information upward (along with the actual blocks
  of instructions). Unfortunately, this strategy falls aparts once we
  try to handle case statements. There, a strictly bottom-up flow of
  register selection information is not possible. After performing
  register selection for a branch, we must consider that information
  in sibling branches. So we end up with information coming in from 
  both the bottom and the top. Manually walking through this process
  in examples, I've not been able to figure out a way to make this work.
  When we annotation with use information first, register selection
  becomes strictly top down. There's a small difficulty with optimizing
  join points to avoid unneeded register shuffling. I still need to
  search for a better solution to this problem. It might be possible
  to provide additional annotations that make this easier.
* Explore the possibility of making `Term` rely more on GADTs and less
  on type families. Answer: Complicated. I think that liquid haskell
  actually has a really good solution to this problem. If you flatten
  everything out into the `Term` type (get rid of `Atom` and `Application`),
  then you can write a predicates like `isAnf`, `isAtom`, `isApplication`.
  Since GHC Haskell lacks true dependent types, it is cumbersome to
  imitate this with Liquid Haskell. The best solution I can think of
  is to tag each of `Term`'s data constructors 
* Parameterize `Term` on additional variables that indicate whether `foreach`
  is allowed and whether data constructor initializers are allowed.
* Investigate making case tests and alternatives more uniform in their
  representation.  
