# Avoiding Let-Case

There is a pattern that looks like this that I thought was necessary in
low-level IRs:

    let x = case y of
          A -> ... a
          B -> ... b
     in z

However, this can be handled with join points:

    lbl go(c) = z
     in case y of
          A -> ... go(a)
          B -> ... go(b)

So, it's possible to require that `case` always appears in a "terminal"
position, and you don't lose any expressivity.

# Getting Rid of WithArray

I have experimented with a `with-array` primitive that exposes a pointer
to the interior of an array. The primitive implies control flow. It can
have any other expression nested inside of it. I am wondering if it is
possible to avoid `with-array`. For example:

    with-array(xsArr -> xsPtr):
      ... use the pointer

Let's consider an immutable array because it is more simple. The alternative
to this approach would be to just make a more ordinary primop:

    let xsPtr = toPtr(xsArr)
     in ... use the pointer

We need to keep the entire array live while the pointer is around. Before,
we had a convenient way to ensure this. We had to check, in a single place,
that no pointer derived from `xsArr` escaped `with-array`. But now, we have
to follow the pointer around with information about its derivation. Crucially,
any pointer being read from must be able to offer information about its
provenance. Above, we know that

    hasBase(xsPtr,xsArr,0)

I am not sure if the exact index needs to be tracked. However, it is possible
for a pointer to be based on one array or another array. For example:

    hasBase(xsPtr,xsArr,0) || hasBase(xsPtr,ysArr,5)

As long as we can track the base, we can make sure the garbage collector does
not eat it. The base may also be a field in an object:

    hasBase(xsPtr,myNode.children,0)

Tracking the offset explicitly helps make sure that we can move the pointer
backwards. The available length could be inferred from the base object, but
we need to be able to write array traversal that are generic in the origin
of the array. So, we probably want several variants of `hasBase` that let
you say whether or not you know anything about the length or the offset.

When you pass a pointer to a function, you are going to keep its base object
live for the duration of the function. For example:

    function(x : Ptr Int) | hasBase(x,something) -> ...

The caller must prove that the pointer is based on something. When lowered
the caller must figure out which object (or objects) the pointer is based
on, and it must make sure that they are pushed to the stack in such a way
that the GC can see them. This is a strange notion of something being an
argument to a function, and it feels related to the zero-use arguments of
quantitative type theory. But it's not really an argument. It just has to
be pushed onto the stack (unless the callee does not allocate and cannot
trigger a GC).

# Examples

Consider an in-place `sort` function:

    sort(x : Ptr Int) | hasBase(x,obj)
     -> (y : Ptr Int) | hasBase(y,obj)

This says that the argument and the result are the same pointer. They are
at the same offset from the base object. What stops someone from returning
a pointer that outlives its base object? I believe this can be stopped by
disallowing existential quantification. Above, `obj` is essentially universally
quantified. What if we tried to allocate something in the function body and
return a pointer into it:

    bad(a : Int)
    -> (y : Ptr Int) | hasBase(y,obj)


