# Data Constructors and Liquid Types

What if a language distinguished between data constructors by using liquid
types? Types still need to be tracked the normal way, but their data
constructors could be handled with tags that are related to availabe
projections by way of an SMT solver. How would this work? Consider a
type like this:

    data TrieNode v
      = Branch (key : W64) (keylen : Int) (mask : W16) (children : Array (TrieNode v))
      | Leaf (key : W64) (keylen : Int) (mask : W16) (values : Array v)
      | Empty

There are some critical invariants not captured by this type:

1. In both cases, popcnt of the mask must equal the length of the array.
2. Empty must never appear as a child of another node (the `Map` type
   in Haskell's `containers` library has a similar invariant).
3. The low bits of `key` must be set to zero. The highest `keylen`
   bits are the meaningful bits.
4. The `keylen` field must be between 0 and 60.

Let's ignore most of the invariants and just focus on invariant (2).
Additionally, let's note that `Branch` and `Leaf` have considerable redundancy.
If factored out, this redundancy would lead to an extra indirection.
However, by not factoring it out, we appear to miss out on an opportunity
to share code in these two paths. Perhaps we can recover this opportunity.

Let's assign each data constructor a number. The exact numbers are not
terribly important, but having `Branch` and `Leaf` be adjacent helps
codegen:

* Empty: 0
* Branch: 1
* Leaf: 2

Now, let us say that every value of type `TrieNode` has a `tag` field (the same
meaning that GRIN and GHC use for the word "tag"). This can be projected.
For example:

    let myTag = myNode.tag // We know that: 0 <= myTag <= 2
    compare myTag 0:
      EQ -> ... // We know that: myTag == 0
      NE -> ... // We know that: 1 <= myTag <= 2

What are the typing rules for projection? Common fields like `key` merely
require that `tag` is either 1 or 2. So, in the `NE` branch, we are free
to project `key`, `keylen`, and `mask`. The trick for this actually working
is that these fields must be layed out in the same way in both data
constructors. Additionally, to avoid confusing the compiler, it's probably
best to not reuse field name unless this shared layout is intended. For
example, `children` and `values` have different names because they are not
even of the same type. So, they should not be allowed to have the same
name.

# Interaction with Mutable Records

The `tag` field is special in that it must be set immidiately when a mutable
record is created. The `tag` field is not eligible for modification. This is
a common restriction resulting from the interaction between sum types and
mutability.
