# The Ultimate Builder

I think I've written this down before, but:

    data Builder a
      = ConsL (Array a) (Builder a)
      | ConsR (Builder a) (Array a)
      | Concat (Builder a) (Builder a)
      | Empty

If `Builder`'s element is `Char` refined, we could end up with
functions like:

    append : forall a p q. Builder (a | p) -> Builder (a | q) -> Builder (a | Union p q)

This requires that `p` and `q` are refinements that are compatible with `a`
in some way. Maybe this could be captured with kinds:

    append : forall a (p : Refine a) (q : Refine a).
      Builder (a | p) -> Builder (a | q) -> Builder (a | Union p q)

But perhaps it is better to require an explicit upcast. This would make
the type of `append` more simple:

    append : Builder a -> Builder a -> Builder a
    upcast : forall a b where a < b. Builder a -> Builder b

More generally, we could have:

    upcast : forall a b where a < b. a -> b

And as far as type inference is concerned, `upcast` cannot synthesize a
result type. It must be given type `b` as an argument:

    -- in the context, a : Int | >=5
    upcast a to Int | >=3

I'm still not sure which implementation of `append` is better. I think that
both should be possible. The one that doesn't mention abstract refinements
is just:

    append : Builder a -> Builder a -> Builder a
    append x y = Concat x y

The other one is:

    append : forall a (p : Refine a) (q : Refine a).
      Builder (a | p) -> Builder (a | q) -> Builder (a | Union p q)
    append x y = Concat
      (upcast x to Builder (a | Union p q))
      (upcast y to Builder (a | Union p q))

It should be possible to typecheck this, because any refinement can be
upcast to itself unioned with any other predicate. Interestingly, even
in this case, we avoid the nasty business of introducing existentials into
`Concat` since `Concat`'s arguments still just have the same type as one
another. However, the abstract refinements make the type of `append` difficult
to read. If supported, such a language feature would inevitably bleed into
both standard and de facto standard libraries. Consider a left fold over lists:

    fold : (b -> a -> b) -> b -> List a -> b

With subsumption, this could instead be:

    fold : forall a b c where a < c. (b -> c -> b) -> b -> List a -> b

But it could go even further. The result type `b` could be upcasted, so
users might want:

    fold : forall a b c d where a < c, b < d. (b -> c -> b) -> b -> List a -> d

And the initial value could be upcasted into a `b`, so:

    fold : forall a b c d e where a < c, b < d, e < b.
      (b -> c -> b) -> e -> List a -> d

This type signature accepts more arguments, but it has obscured the original
intent. When are abstract refinements useful? One first thought is functions
like `map`. But if `map` operates on a container that is polymorphic is its
element type, then abstract refinements are not needed because the refinement
goes with the type:

    map : forall a b. (a -> b) -> List a -> List b
    map @(Int | < 10) @(Int | < 50) _ : List (Int | < 10) -> List (Int | < 50)

More compelling is the case of monomorphic containers:

    map : (Char -> Char) -> Text -> Text

Here, `Char` and `Text` may be refined in the same way, and we would like to be
able to make this association clear:

    map : (Char | p -> Char | q) -> Text | p -> Text | q

This is compelling. I need to think about this more.
