# Integers in C backend for compiler

One difficulty with making a C backend for a language is dealing with integers.
Here are the goals:

1. Signed and unsigned integers are not distinguished in the type system
   of the higher-level IR. We want this to avoid needless code duplication.
   Unsigned integers are used for bit arrays, not numbers. 
2. The generated C code should be readable. This means not putting integer
   cast all over the place.

There are two ways to approach this. One is to abandon goal 1 and distinguish
signed and unsigned integers in the type system. This might not be that bad
since bit arrays are rarely used with polymorphic code.

The other approach is to choose C types based on which functions actually get
called on the argument. This makes the types of generated C functions unstable.
I think the first approach is better.

# Boxed Types in C Backend

This is kind of tricky too. So, we don't want `void*` just getting tossed
around everywhere and then casted at use sites. That would be implied
by this:

    data Type
      = Int
      | Bits
      | Box

So, what we can do instead is add an optional argument to `Box` indicating
the true type if it is known.

    data Type
      = Int
      | Bits
      | Box (Maybe StructType)

In C, we need to use `struct metadata_t*` to mean `Box Nothing`. Here are
some C structures that back everything:

    struct metadata_t
      { int32_t refCount;
      , int32_t tag;
      };
    struct person_t
      { struct metadata_t metadata;
      , int64_t age;
      , ...
      };

And then for disjoint unions, we would do:

    struct cons_t
      { struct metadata_t metadata;
      , int64_t head;
      , void* tail;
      };
    struct nil_t
      { struct metadata_t metadata;
      };

Or alternatively:

    struct metadata_t
      { int32_t refCount;
      };
    struct list_t
      { struct metadata_t metadata;
      , int32_t tag;
      };
    struct cons_t
      { struct list_t list;
      , int64_t head;
      , void* tail;
      };
    struct nil_t
      { struct list_t list;
      };

This will work fine. We can convert from any object to `struct metadata_t*`
and then safely convert back to the original type, and a C compiler should be
alright with this. With the second approach, we can get a little more
typechecking help from the C compiler. Plus, we avoid tags for data types
that do not need them, which saves space.

Something worth mentioning is that we do need separate `cons_t` types for
boxed elements and for integer elements. Also, the one for boxed elements
needs to store the elements as type `struct metadata_t*`, and these must
be upcasted at their use sites. It's a little unfortunate, and it adds
some line noise, but it should be fine. 

Here is an example of how this would be used. Included are two functions
whose dumped assembly can be inspected to confirm that GCC's alias analysis
works as expected:

    #include <stdint.h>
    #include <stdbool.h>
    #include <stdlib.h>
    
    struct metadata_t
      { int32_t refCount
      ;
      };
    struct list_t
      { struct metadata_t metadata
      ; int32_t tag
      ;
      };
    struct cons_t
      { struct list_t list
      ; int64_t head;
      ; struct list_t* tail
      ;
      };
    struct nil_t
      { struct list_t list
      ;
      };
    
    bool isNil(struct list_t* xs) {
      switch(xs->tag) {
        case 0:
          return true;
        case 1:
          return false;
        default:
          return true;
      }
    }
    
    int64_t headOrZero(struct list_t* xs) {
      switch(xs->tag) {
        case 0:
          return 0;
        case 1: ;
          struct cons_t* ys = (struct cons_t*)xs;
          return ys->head;
        default:
          return 0;
      }
    }
    
    struct list_t* allocCons(int64_t head, struct list_t* tail) {
      struct cons_t* r = malloc(sizeof(struct cons_t));
      r->head = head;
      r->tail = tail;
      r->list.tag = 1;
      r->list.metadata.refCount = 1;
      return (struct list_t*)r;
    }
    
    // tickles alias analysis
    int32_t weirdTrickAlpha(struct list_t* xs, struct metadata_t* ys) {
      xs->metadata.refCount = 5;
      ys->refCount = 7;
      return xs->metadata.refCount;
    }
    
    // tickles alias analysis
    int32_t weirdTrickBeta(struct nil_t* xs, struct cons_t* ys) {
      xs->list.metadata.refCount = 5;
      ys->list.metadata.refCount = 7;
      return xs->list.metadata.refCount;
    }

It's neat that this works. At least, I think it's pretty cool.

So, coming back to the original point of discussion, being able to specify the
types of boxed things is important. It's the difference between the
generated C code being:

    int64_t headOrZero(struct list_t* xs)

and being 

    int64_t headOrZero(struct metadata_t* xs)

The first one is preferable since it empowers the C compiler to help us more.

Explicit casting in the IR is probably going to be important since it helps
direct C code generation:

    data Type
      = Int
      | Bits
      | Box (Maybe BoxedType)
    data Term
      = Pure Atom
      | ...
    data Atom
      = Integer Int64
      | Var VarId
      | Downcast Atom BoxedType -- convert list_t to cons_t
      | Upcast Atom BoxedType   -- convert cons_t to list_t
      | Upcast_ Atom            -- convert cons_t to metadata_t

We can even do a little bit of typechecking with this, although it's easy to
subvert the type system by upcasting to `metadata_t` and then downcasting.
That seems fine though. I don't think that the casts will get in the way
of optimization. Also, this will help will with typechecking field accesses.
