# Type Synthesis with Liquid Types

I recently tried to implement a type system with liquid types, and then after
getting a mostly working prototype up, I read the
[PLDI 2008 Liquid Types paper](https://goto.ucsd.edu/~rjhala/liquid/liquid_types.pdf).
They provide both a standard set of rules for type checking (figure 3)
and an algorithm for type inference (figure 4). The algorithm for
inference feels a bit complicated, and I have an idea for a different
approach that puts type synthesis at the forefront.

In a bidirectional system, we would want `LET` to have a rule like this:

    Γ |- b => B -| ∆     ∆,(x:B) |- e => E -| ∆',(x:B),Θ
    ---------------------------------------------------
            Γ  |-  let x = b in e => E -|  ∆'

Note that this rule only uses synthesis, not checking. The other important
thing is that this rule removes any mention of `x` from the output context.
Liquid types complicate this a little. What's different?

* Above, `B` may be an unrefined type (like `Int`) or a refined type like `i`
  where is introduced somewhere in `∆`.
* The contexts can contain introductions of refined type variables and can
  have refinements. These are ordered.

What's the tricky part? In the original DK system, discarding `Θ` was
safe because it just caused either solved or unsolved types to be
discarded. However, now `Θ` may contain the introduction of a
refined type variable that `E` depends on. Discarding `Θ` could
cause `E` to become ill-formed. How can this be ameliorated?

I think there is a straightforward solution. First, let's consider
an example. The most simple example is something like

    makePositive : (arg : Int) -> (res : Int | res > 0)
    scramble     : (arg : Int) -> (res : Int)
    let x = scramble y in makePositive x

The context `Γ` is `[y : Int]` and `∆` is the same. The we extend
this context to `[y : Int, x : Int]`, and then `makePositive x`
will synthesis type `res` with the output context being:

    [y : Int, x : Int, reftype res : Int, res > 0]

We cannot discard `res`, but we really need to get of `x` since it
isn't needed anymore. One solution would be to make the context
with refinement variables and predicates a separate, and constantly
growing, context. This would mean that the the above example would
have:

    INPUT CTX: [y : Int]
    INPUT REF: []
    OUTPUT CTX: [y : Int]
    OUTPUT REF: [res : Int, res > 0]
    SYNTHESIZED TYPE: res

The main tweak to the DK system would be that subtyping would be
extended to work on refinement variables. To do so, it would need
to consult the entire refinement context and then invoke an SMT
solver. Let's see if I can make this work.
