# Known Shapes in an IR

I was playing around with a ANF-with-join-points IR recently, and I ran into
something tricky. Several different optimizations require knowing the shape
of an argument. These include at least:

* Constant folding (e.g. `A + B`)
* Case of known data constructor (`let x = Just ... in case x of ...`)
* Case of case

How should we communicate this information about the shape of arguments? I had
been trying to use this in a project:

    data Arg
      = ArgLiteral !Lit
      | ArgLocal !LocalId
    data Lit
      = LitWord !Word
      | LitBool !Bool
      | LitArray !Type !(SmallArray Lit)
      | LitBoxed !DataConId !(SmallArray Lit)

But it is unsatisfying. It has three undesirable behaviors:

* Only fully-known data is represented by `Lit`. Many optimizations only
  require knowing the outermost data constructor.
* Large literals could be duplicated a lot. With integer and boolean literals,
  this doesn't matter. But with boxed data, the increased space consumption
  at compile time could be bad.  

An alternative is to annotate let-bound variable with their shape (only
during optimization). Instead of:

    data Expr
      = Let LocalId Expr Expr
      | ...

We could have:

    data Expr
      = Let LocalId Shape Expr Expr
      | ...
    data Shape
      = ShapeUnknown
      | ShapeArray !Type !(SmallArray Arg)
      | ShapeBoxed !DataConId !(SmallArray Arg)

Notice that the information we get about the object is shallow. It is possible
to allow it to be deeper with:

    data Shape
      = ShapeUnknown
      | ShapeArg !Arg
      | ShapeArray !Type !(SmallArray Shape)
      | ShapeBoxed !DataConId !(SmallArray Shape)

I'm not totally sure what the best way to do this is. The first `Shape` is
insufficient. Consider this example:

    let x = case y of
          42 -> [13,19,z,z]
          _ -> [17,19,w,z]
    let p = index x 1 

In the above example, what do we know about `x`?

    ShapeArray Word [ShapeUnknown, ShapeArg (ArgLiteral (LitWord 19)), ShapeUnknown, ShapeArg (ArgLocal z)]

So, any indexing of position 1 or 3 can be constant folded. I need to think
more about the shallow-vs-deep thing. I don't like having `Shape` be deep
like it is, but the shallow representation I gave earlier is no good.
