# Cache-Coherent Tries

One difficulty with making tries cache coherent is that, even if you do
a good job with the branch nodes, it's difficult to pack leaves to a
full cache line. You've got a pointer to the full key, the key length,
and a value. So, probably three words, plus one more word as a tag or
for a GC to identify the objects. That puts you at four words. It would
be better if it were possible to pack 8 words into a leaf, but doing this
is difficult. Unlike a B+ Tree, a trie isn't height balanced, so it is easy
to end up with leaves that look jagged. One possibility is unpacking the keys
into the `Leaf` data constructor, but that results in loss of sharing.
It might just not be possible to do any better.

However, the branches certainly can be improved. Here is an exerpt from
a pretty print of a trie built from 1000 prefix-free English words:

    y
    Branch 1
      [ ( a , Leaf "yard" )
      , ( e , Branch 2
          [ ( 'a' , Branch 3
              [ ( 'h' , Leaf "yeah" )
              , ( 'r' , Leaf "year" )
              ]
            )
          , ( 's' , Leaf "yes" )
          , ( 't' , Leaf "yet" )
          ]
        )
      , ( 'o' , Branch 3
          [ ( 'n' , Leaf "young" )
          , ( 'r' , Leaf "yourself" )
          ]
        )
      ]

A strategy I've been thinking about is grouping by tetragrams when possible.
That would turn the above into:

    y
    Branch4 1
      [ ( ard0 , Leaf "yard" )
      , ( eah0 , Leaf "yeah" )
      , ( ear0 , Leaf "year" )
      , ( es00 , Leaf "yes" )
      , ( et00 , Leaf "yet" )
      , ( oung , Leaf "young" )
      , ( ours , Leaf "yourself" )
      ]

This example was cherry picked and represents one of the best imaginable
cases for this. Notice that it is necessary to NUL pad the keys. To make this
work correctly on octet sequences that contain the zero byte, we would need
to store the length as well. Here is the layout for `Branch4` that I imagine:

    struct Branch4 {
      uint32_t tetragrams[8]; // 32 bytes
      uint8_t  lengths[8];    // 8 bytes
      node*    children[];    // 8, 16, 24, 32, 40, 48, 56, or 64 bytes
    }

In the worst case, this is under two cache lines. The above example requires
(roughly) 104 bytes for the branch node and then 24 bytes for each of the
7 leaf nodes. Before, we had 4 branch nodes, and assuming we pack them in
a clever way, we could maybe get them down to about 32 bytes each. This is
all very hand-wavy. The point is that we might break even on space (we happen
to win in this case), but cache coherence looks much better. We've cut the
number of indirections needed for the word "yeah" by two.

When are we able to do this kind of compression? I'm not totally sure. I think
that we might be able to do it anywhere in the trie. Certainly, it works for a
trie that is a static data structure. But what about a dynamic structure? Can
we use it as we are building it? I think so, but I haven't really fully thought
through this. I think you can just make all of your branch nodes start out as
whatever the biggest n-gram you support is (probably 8-grams), and then you
can split them up as they would begin to overflow. So, going back to the Y-words
example, if we added two more words that started with Y, the `Branch4` node
would need to break apart. I think you would want to try breaking into `Branch2`
nodes. Let's say you added "yelp" and "youths":

    y
    Branch2 1
      [ ( ar , Leaf "yard" )
      , ( ea , Branch2 3
          [ ( h0, Leaf "yeah" )
          , ( r0, Leaf "year" )
          ]
        )
      , ( el , Leaf "yelp" )
      , ( es , Leaf "yes" )
      , ( et , Leaf "yet" )
      , ( ou , Branch2 3
          [ ( ng, Leaf "young" )
          , ( rs, Leaf "yours" )
          , ( th, Leaf "youths" )
          ]
        )
      ]

One interesting decision was the choice of `Branch2` for the children of the
"ea" and "ou" digrams. We don't even know upfront that `Branch2` is going to
be sufficient. It is possible that we may need another split. I think that is
fine though. There are two more serious issues:

* This strategy does not play well with the gaps crit-bit trees usually
  have. If you created a gap of 7 or 3, then when you needed to make a
  branch in the middle of it, it would be difficult to figure out what
  size to choose.
* The order of insertion impacts the shape of the trie.

For these reasons, I think it is probably better to restrict N-gram nodes
to occur at positions that divide N evenly. This means that the above Y-words
example would not be allowed since it has a `Branch2` at position 1. The
`Branch2` would need to appear at position 2, 4, 6, etc. Instead, we would
have:

    y
    Branch1 1
      [ ( a , Leaf "yard" )
      , ( e , Branch2 2
          [ ( ah , Leaf "yeah" )
          , ( ar , Leaf "year" )
          , ( s0 , Leaf "yes0" )
          , ( t0 , Leaf "yet0" )
          ]
        )
      , ( o , Branch2 2
          [ ( un , Leaf "young" )
          , ( ur , Leaf "yourself" )
          ]
        )
      ]

This helps us less than the tetragrams that we originally had, but it makes
other decisions more obvious. For example, even though "young" and "yourself"
differ at index 3, we start the branch at index 2. We do this because we find
the index first, and then we find the biggest branch we can use to accomodate
that index. I've not verified this, but I believe that this strategy results
in a trie having the same shape regardless of the order in which the insertions
were performed. If we add "yelp" and "youths" again, we will get:

    y
    Branch1 1
      [ ( a , Leaf "yard" )
      , ( e , Branch2 2
          [ ( ah , Leaf "yeah" )
          , ( ar , Leaf "year" )
          , ( lp , Leaf "yelp" )
          , ( s0 , Leaf "yes0" )
          , ( t0 , Leaf "yet0" )
          ]
        )
      , ( o , Branch2 2
          [ ( un , Leaf "young" )
          , ( ur , Leaf "yourself" )
          , ( ut , Leaf "youths" )
          ]
        )
      ]

For illustration, if we add two long words like "yellowtail" and "yellowware", we
would get:

    y
    Branch1 1
      [ ( a , Leaf "yard" )
      , ( e , Branch2 2
          [ ( ah , Leaf "yeah" )
          , ( ar , Leaf "year" )
          , ( ll , Branch4 4
            [ ( owta , Leaf "yellowtail" )
            , ( owwa , Leaf "yellowware" )
            ]
          , ( lp , Leaf "yelp" )
          , ( s0 , Leaf "yes0" )
          , ( t0 , Leaf "yet0" )
          ]
        )
      , ( o , Branch2 2
          [ ( un , Leaf "young" )
          , ( ur , Leaf "yourself" )
          , ( ut , Leaf "youths" )
          ]
        )
      ]

According to the rules presented above, the choice of `Branch4` is forced. The
two differ at position 6, and we are currently at position 4. We must use
the biggest ngram size that we can, which is 4. Arguably, `Branch2 6` is
a better choice, and it would work fine for lookups. However, it makes the
whole system more simple if we start by having nodes be too large and then
split them as needed. Consider what would happen now if we inserted the made-up
word "yellops". With the 4-gram `Branch4`, we would just add the key "ops0".
But if we had used the `Branch2` and skipping characters 5 and 6, we would now
need to add a `Branch2` for these (or maybe only a `Branch1` if there's is no
rule forcing us to use the biggest one possible). But this would result in
a structure that is more poorly organized for cache than it needs to be.
Retroactively englarging the nodes (bumping it from a 2-gram to a 4-gram)
would be difficult because we do not have access to the characters we need.

When then would DJB's original byte-skipping (it was actually bit skipping in
his original presentation of the idea) show up? Seldom, but it would still
show up and play a useful role. Since branches start out large and then are
broken up as needed, the only skips that exist must cross 8-byte boundaries.
And the destination is always a multiple of 8. Certainly, this will be
uncommon. It might be better to just drop the feature entirely. But maybe
not. Two things it offers:

* A little bit of DOS resistence against long input. It prevents 8x size
  amplification of a single 1MB string.
* Much better (both space and time) on long random input.

So maybe it's better to keep it. I wonder what a good way to represent this
data type is. Probably:

    data Node
      = Leaf
          Text -- all bytes of key
          Int -- length of key
          Value -- value associated with key
      | BranchNybble
          Int -- starting position
          NybbleMap (NybbleMap Node) -- unpack outer nybble map
      | Branch1
          Int -- starting position
          32xW8 -- single-byte key slices 
          Node[] -- flexible array of children
      | Branch2
          Int -- starting position
          16xW16 -- two-byte key slices 
          16xW8  -- lengths, either 1 or 2
          Node[] -- flexible array of children
      | Branch4
          Int -- starting position
          8xW32 -- four-byte key slices 
          8xW8  -- lengths, either 1, 2, 3, or 4
          Node[] -- flexible array of children
      | Branch8
          Int -- starting position
          4xW8 -- eight-byte key slices 
          4xW8  -- lengths, either 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8
          Node[] -- flexible array of children
    data NybbleMap v = NybbleMap
      Word16 -- a bitmap, used like in HAMT for mapping keys to array indices
      v[] -- flexible array of v

Thoughts. The starting positions are redundant in most places, but it makes
the structure more compact to put them everywhere rather than only at
entrypoints into 8-byte chunks. If you use more than 32 characters as your
alphabet, BranchNybble will get used.

What needs to change for prefixes to be allowed? That's an important question
because disallowing prefixes is an onerous restriction. I think that you just
need to add a `Maybe (Text,Int,Value)` to all of the `Branch*` data
constructors. Almost certainly, you'll want that triple to sit behind a
pointer. This adds 8 bytes to every `Branch*` data constructor, which is
fine. Interestingly, this makes `Leaf` a kind of degenerate childless branch.
It might improve performance to make the triple in `Leaf` optional and put it
behind a pointer. Then you could line up that field in every data constructor
so that in the code that handles "end of needle", you would not need to
scrutinize the node. This adds an extra pointer to a bunch of operations
though, so I don't like this. You could instead put it in the same slot in
every `Branch*` data constructor, and that would help you cut down on code
without compromising the data layout.

Figuring out the zero padding stuff and treating string as though they are
truncated will be a pain. There is a way to do this. I just don't have much
experience with that kind of thing.
