# Stack-Oblivious Garbage Collection

One of the difficulties of garbage collection is integration with the stack.
Conservative collectors (e.g. Boehm) try to guess which things on the stack
are pointers. They cannot relocate anything because if you relocate
an "object" that was "pointed to" by something that merely looked like
a pointer, then it's game over. No relocation means no bump allocation.
Also, conservative collectors break more and more as C compilers become
smarter. Just because there is a live pointer doesn't mean that it's
going to end up in a stack frame when you call some other function. This
isn't just an issue of "the Standard doesn't guarantee it". It's that
in practice, compilers do not make this guarantee either. This has been
an issue for as long as conservative collectors have existed, and no
one has ever solved it.

Precise collectors exhibit control over the stack. They know the meaning
of every word in a stack frame, and they ensure that all live pointers
are pushed to a stack frame when calling a function. These stack frames
can then be traversing when garbage collection happens. You can go two
routes: relocating or non-relocating. With relocation, you don't just
traverse the stack frames - you update them as well.

What's the problem? Integration with the stack mixes concerns. The stack
serves at least these purposes:

* Place for spilled registers
* Place to preserve environment during function calls

Precise garbage collection adds a third purpose:

* Place to anchor pointers during function calls

Tools like LLVM are good at using the stack for the original two purposes.
Support for garbage collection has been added to LLVM as an afterthought.
Twice. (The original `llvm.gcroot` stuff is considered legacy.) I have not
been able to find examples of anyone using LLVM's GC mechanisms (either
`llvm.gcroot` or the newer statepoint stuff).

Rather than belabor the stack-frame-overloading conundrum, I'll get to
the actual question: Can we make a garbage collector that works without any
access to stack frames? Why attempt this? Because such a collector would
make it possible to use the well-tested fragment of LLVM.

The important question to answer is: How can we figure out which objects
are pointed to by the stack? We need to know who might be pointed to
by the stack because these objects cannot be relocated. They cannot
be relocated because we cannot know where the pointers in the stack
frames are.

Perhaps we can approximate the set of pointers in stack frames. The
approximation needs to be a superset. This superset could be treated
as the root set, and then we could proceed with garbage collection as
usual, with the caveat that nothing directly pointed to by a pointer
in a stack frame is allowed to be relocated. Keep in mind stacks should
not typically grow very large, so it's not like in a typical program,
you should expect to see very many pointers in stack frames.

How to do it though? Let's assume that it is possible to trace the
nursery. When we trace the nursery, we need a way to figure out which
things might be pointed to by the stack. We could do this by messing
with a header word every time we access objects. That would be expensive
though. You do not want for field projection to require a store. Let's
consider the tools in our arsenal:

* Marking a header word
* Duplicating immutable objects (hopefully at most once)
* Auxiliary stack of pointers

Roughly, what I would like to try to accomplish is relocating garbage
collection that relocates all objects except for those pointed to by
the stack. Everything pointed to by the stack is, in a sense, "pinned",
because we cannot update the stack. But we can change the pointers in
objects on the heap. How can this be done?

The system of managed object I envision only has two generations: young
and old. The young generation is populated by a bump allocator. The old
generation uses RC (nothing in the old gen ever gets moved). Pointers in
the stack to old-gen objects are fine. The shadow stack will inform the
GC that these are live. Plus, we can take a pointer that was on the
stack and stick it in an object. It is certainly going to be a valid
pointer.

The young generation is a little trickier. When objects are promoted to
the old generation (evacuation), some of their pointers may need to be
updated because objects that they point to may have been evacuated as
well. This is standard Cheney collection. For anything that is not
referenced by the stack, we can just do the normal thing. For anything
referenced by the stack, we have two options:

1. Make a copy of it and have pointers to both the original and
   the old-gen copy.
2. Leave it where it is and classify the whole block as "old".

The serious problem with option 1 is that you really want the old-gen
version of the object to show up everywhere, but enforcing this is
costly. Option 2 is better. The drawback to it is that it leads to
fragmentation. These aged blocks are not like the normal old-gen
blocks. The normal old-gen blocks use size classes so that you can
reuse slots. These converted nursery blocks do not have size classes.
Objects of any size may be in them, and we cannot easily add more
objects to them. We just have to wait until all objects in the block
stop being referenced, and then we can reuse the entire block.

What if we eschew size classes in the old gen in favor of the
old-school power-of-two-sized buddy-allocator blocks? Everything in
the nursery already has this shape, so in-place aging would be easy.
If we did this, then we would still need to relocate many nursery
objects to the old generation. But the ones that could not be relocated
(because of pointers from the stack) would just have their blocks
converted to old-gen blocks. These blocks would likely have lots
of free space in them, but they could be used to service future
promotions (or even promotions from the current collection!). Bonuses
that this GC scheme offers:

1. One possibility is to just promote blocks in-place when it is detected
   that a high percentage of their objects are live (avoiding copying).
   I am not sure how worthwhile this optimization actually is.
2. Pinning an existing object (probably a byte sequence) is extremely cheap.
   Just mark its block for in-place aging. In GHC, you must decide at
   allocation time whether or not a `ByteArray#` is pinned. In this
   scheme, everything starts out unpinned and then the pinning happens
   only when (and if) it is actually necessary. Keep in mind though that
   pinning is needed so often in GHC because of how `safe` FFI calls
   work in the threaded runtime. In the runtime I envision, pinning
   would only be needed when calling certain C functions that have
   a certain kind of nonblocking interface (`librdkafka` falls into this
   category but nonblocking POSIX sockets do not).

I like this idea because it is simple. What I dislike about it is
that buddy allocators have fragmentation problems. But the fragmentation
issues do not worry me too much. Also, large objects
(those larger than 1KB or maybe 4KB) would have to be handled in some
other way, but that's pretty normal.

I need to check to see if this idea is compatible with the ideas
from the discussion of Mutable Objects and Reference Counting
on 2021-01-19.

Also, it would be great if there is a way to get pointers down
to 32 bits each. That would halve the memory footprint of the
shadow stack. However, I doubt this is possible.
