# Uses of Refinements

I'm thinking about whether I prefer liquid-haskell-style dependent refinements
or something more simple. My main use cases are:

* Safe indexing for vectors
* Indicating that certain data constructors cannot appear
* Relational algebra

For vectors, it's possible to get a lot of what you need by just having
dependent relevant arguments that are numbers:

    get     : forall (n : Nat) (m : Nat). Vector m (Int | _ < n) -> (Int | _ < n)
    permute : forall (n : Nat) (m : Nat). Vector m (Int | _ < n) -> Vector n a -> Vector m a

I'm not totally sure how this works with subtyping. It's easy to set it
up to have `_ < 10` be a subtype of `_ < 20`, but it would be nice be
be able to have `_ < n` be a subtype of `_ < n + m`. For this to even
be true, you have to restrict the domain of all quantified numbers to
be nonnegative.

With subtyping, you sometimes have to return a vector with an existentially
quantified size.

For relational algebra, sets are important. All the sets live at the type
level though. You have functions like:

    naturalJoin : Relation rs -> Relation ss -> Relation (Union rs ss)

You also sometimes need to say that a set is a subset of another set or
that an element is a member of a set. This feels a lot more like a constraint:

    project : (IsSubsetOf ss rs) => Relation rs -> Relation ss -> Relation ss

When typechecking an application of `project`, you would have to figure out
the instantiations of `rs` and `ss` and then confirm that the constraint
held. Doing the constraint this way is kind of annoying. It feels different
than dealing with numbers. With numbers, we asked for something to be less
than something else using a refinement, not a constraint.

What if we had this instead:

    project : forall (rs : Set) (ss : Set | _ < rs). Relation rs -> Relation ss -> Relation ss

This is more like the way we dealt with integers. However, refinements are
allowed on kinds, and the whole thing is a bit more dependently typed. Here,
however, there are no constraints.

There are things that this system cannot handle well. Disjointedness cannot be
tested. Also, I don't know how to communicate elementhood.
