# More Thoughts on IRs

I've got this idea for sea-of-nodes-style IR that looks like:

    data Node
      = Add Arg Arg
      | Multiply Arg Arg
      | Case Arg (SmallArray Alt)
      | Label !Context -- defines a join point
      | Jump -- invariant: nothing can depend on a jump
          !LabelId -- invariant: label is in scope
          !(SmallArray Arg) -- arguments to join point
      | Call Function (SmallArray Arg)
    
    data Context = Context
      { args :: !(SmallArray LocalId)
      , body :: !(Map LocalId Node)
      , res :: !Arg
      }

That's basically it. Data dependence has the same backwards feel that it does
in FIRM. That is, you start with `res` and then work your way back to figure
out what it requires. This is what I call "ANF" in the entry from 2021-04-28.

The question is: what should this be compiled to? In the entry from 2021-04-28,
I proposed a multi-phase compilation strategy. I think that idea is pretty good.

There are some refinements I wanted to mention:

1. Three-Address Code (TAC). At what point should we drop down to TAC? 
   This has to happen before virtual register allocation (or alongside it).
2. Control flow. At some point, we have to switch from high-level control
   flow constructs (`case`, `foreach`) to labels and jumps. I think that
   it is best to do this as late as possible. After doing this, I think
   that the only important remaining optimization will be to eliminate
   some jumps by putting basic blocks next to each other.

# Heap Pointer Stuff

What about combining heap checks? Let's say that we have something like
this:

    x := a + 5
    y := b + 1
    bumpHeap 24
    write HP[0] 0xdeadbeefdeadbeef   // A header word
    write HP[8] x
    write HP[16] y
    z := c + 8
    bumpHeap 24
    write HP[0] 0xdeadbeefdeadbeef
    write HP[8] z
    write HP[16] y

It would be better to combine the heap pointer bumps (and checks, however
they may be implemented). We want to end up with:

    x := a + 5
    y := b + 1
    bumpHeap 48
    write HP[0] 0xdeadbeefdeadbeef
    write HP[24] 0xdeadbeefdeadbeef
    write HP[8] x
    write HP[16] y
    write HP[40] y
    z := c + 8
    write HP[32] z

This has several advantages. The values `y` and `z` no longer overlap, so
register pressure is reduced. Also, we perform a single subtraction rather
than two subtractions to bump the heap pointer downward. And depending on
how heap checks are implemented, we might save additional instructions.

The question is: When can we figure out which heap pointer bumps/checks
can be consolidated? Ideally, we should do this when lowering from the
partially ordered ANF.
