# Decompressing Multiple Logarithmically Distributed Integers

## Background

For decades, a technique known as LEB128 and `varint` has been available
for compressing logarithmically distributed integers. There is a variant
[described on Hacker News](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=11263378)
known as Prefix Variant that moves all of the control bits to the front.
In that post, the original varint is described as:

    7 bits -> 0xxxxxxx
    14 bits -> 1xxxxxxx 0xxxxxxx
    ...
    35 bits -> 1xxxxxxx 1xxxxxxx 1xxxxxxx 1xxxxxxx 0xxxxxxx
    ...
    128 bits -> 1xxxxxxx 1xxxxxxx 1xxxxxxx ... xxxxxxxx

Prefix varint is described as:

    7 bits -> 0xxxxxxx
    14 bits -> 10xxxxxx xxxxxxxx
    ...
    35 bits -> 11110xxx xxxxxxxx xxxxxxxx xxxxxxxx xxxxxxxx
    ...
    128 bits -> 11111111 11111111 xxxxxxxx xxxxxxxx ... xxxxxxxx

Can the decoding of prefix-varint-encoded integers be accelerated by SIMD?
That's what I want to explore here?

## Parallel Instructions

There are several instructions that are not yet widely available but that
might help with implementation.

### VPCOMPRESS

Intel describes this as:

> Compress (stores) up to 64 byte values or 32 word values from the source
> operand (second operand) to the destination operand (first operand),
> based on the active elements determined by the writemask operand

This is similar to `PEXT`, but it extracts bytes instead of bits.

### VPEXPANDB

Intel describes this as:

> Expands (loads) up to 64 byte integer values or 32 word integer values
> from the source operand (memory operand) to the destination operand
> (register operand), based on the active elements determined by the
> writemask operand.

This is similar to `PDEP`, but again, it's moving bytes, not bits, around.

## Approach

Let's say we have four compressed 64-bit integers stuck together. Let's
move control words (indicating byte count) to the front:

* Original Numbers: 1, 882, 0, 2
* Counts: 1,2,1,1
* Bytes: 0x01, 0x03, 0x72, 0x00, 0x02 (big-endian, but could be done little endian)

The byte counts can each be represented by 3 bits, so we need 12 bits
(rounds up to 2 bytes) at the front to handle this. The remaining content
is variable length but ends up being 5 bytes in our case. What we want
to end up with is:

    +--------------------------------------------------------
    | 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 01 | 00 00 00 00 00 00 03 72 | ...
    +--------------------------------------------------------

I believe that `VPEXPANDB` should do the trick. We need a mask that looks
like this:

    00000001 00000011 00000001 00000001

How can we make that mask? One option would just be to encode the byte counts
like this directly. But that costs additional space (8 bits instead of 3 bits
per integer). We can use `PDEP` to pad these out:

    000_001_000_000_xxxx (each element is a byte count minus 1)
    ==>
    00000000_00000001_00000000_00000000

Actually, this needs to be padded out even more. There is no `PSLLB`
instuction, so we can only left shift 16-bit words (`PSLLW`). This might actually
be fine though. After the additional padding to make it to 16 bits, a
left shift of the constant 1 as each vector element, and a decrement
on each vector element, we get this:

    00000000_00000001 00000000_00000011 00000000_00000001 00000000_00000001

This looks like the mask we wanted for `VPEXPANDB` except that it has
extra zeroes in it. These can be removed with a shuffle operation. And
then we have to actually move from the SIMD register to a mask register.
So, the total sequence of operations is:

1. `PDEP` with statically known selector (pad to 16 bits each)
2. `MOVQ` to switch to ZMM reg
3. `PSLLW`
4. `PSUBW` to subtract 1 from everything
5. shuffle to remove upper zero byte from each 16-bit element
6. `KMOV` to move mask to mask register (might require two moves,
   not sure about moving straight from ZMM to mask reg)
7. `VPEXPANDB`

That's more than I wish it was. If there were a `PSLLB`, it would be possible
to knock the instruction count down by one. Also, I wonder if there is a way
to accomplish 

    000_001_000_000_xxxx
    ==>
    00000001_00000011_00000001_00000001

without leaving general-purpose registers.
