# Four Bytes for Most Pointers

[Handles are the better pointers](https://floooh.github.io/2018/06/17/handles-vs-pointers.html)
proposes a way to deal with pointers that makes pointer compression possible
in C. The article provides a lot of game-dev specific arguments in favor of
the approach, but I'm interested in doing something else with it. The idea
in the article is to just have a different buffer for each type of object.
Cool. Kind of like how golang has slabs for different size classes. But the
neat thing that this article argues, something I've not read or considered
before, is that objects can all be referenced relative to their base. So,
you would have one slab for each different type of object, but pointers to
that object would be represented as an offset. In practice, this means that
you can knock a lot of pointers down to 32 bits, maybe even 16 bits if you
are super confident that you will not have very many of them.

We can combine this technique with JVM-style pointer compression. This exploits
the known 8-byte alignment of objects to provide 32GB of heap instead of 4GB.
However, we can do better. What if we got 32GB of heap for each object type?
For objects with 16B or 32B alignment, we could get 64GB or 128GB respectively.
This would result in a few more instructions though since x86 `LEA` cannot
multiply by anything higher than 8. So, I think you would have to do `LEA`
twice, once to multiply the offset by 8 and then another time to muliply it
by 8 again and add to the base.

What about these base addresses? What about hard-coding them? This would be
bad for ASLR because now an attacker could know where certain types of
objects are in memory. Oh well.

What about allocation? That's the bad part. You cannot use a nursery with
this approach because this approach requires homogeneity of objects within
a block of memory. So, all allocations will be kind of slow. But maybe only
kind of. You cannot do true bump allocation, but you could do bump allocation
in each object-specific slab. Then you could do your copying during nursery
collection. Basically, instead of getting to keep the nursery pointer in
a register, you would have the known location of each nursery pointer
somewhere in memory. Then, for each allocation, you would need to load
the object-specific nursery pointer, increment it, and write it back
to memory. To be honest, this is not really that bad. You incur an
extra load and store, but they will both almost certainly be L1 cache.
Also, if you allocate multiple objects of the same type at the same time,
you can consolidate the loads/stores.

Just throwing another variant out there. You could totally do this based
on size class instead of based on object type.

What about arrays? Arrays are in a tight spot. It's really nice to be
able to slice into an array at any position. For a boxed array, this
would mean that an array's alignment is degraded to 4-byte alignment.
For byte arrays, you've only got 1-byte alignment. There are some
options though. Byte arrays could just be done with 8-byte pointers
so that we aren't restricted to 4GB of byte arrays (byte arrays are
extremely common data). Using 64 bits for pointers to bytes would
also make sharing data with C more straightforward. It's uncommon
to pass most types of objects from a managed language to C, but passing
managed byte arrays is essential. It would be nice to be able to have
managed object types that mirrored certain POSIX `struct`s.
For arrays of boxed things, it's a bit more up in the air. Being
restricted to 16GB of array data doesn't seem that bad especially
when you consider that the 4B objects being pointed to would probably
take up at least 64GB.

Having nearly all pointers be only 4 bytes seems awesome. At first,
I thought that this would require tons of monomorphization, but that's
not actually true. Although each object type would have a different
base, it would only be necessary to consult the base if the object
were being either allocated or read. The object is never actually
read in polymorphic contexts. So, all those polymorphic functions would
really only need one copy of their code. Well, maybe two. You would
need a copy for 4-byte pointers and another for 8-byte pointers.

Also, there is an important interaction with having multiple data
constructors. Basically, each data constructor needs to go in a
different slab because they are not all the same size. But the slabs
must be near each other because pointers for different data constructors
must all use the same base. This is not a huge problem, just an observation.
Also, this nudges us in the direction of pointer tagging, but in this
situation, the tag bit or bits are truly part of the offset.
