# Mocks for Network Protocols

I was looking back over an implementation of Elastic's lumberjack protocol
that I had written a while back, and I starting thinking about how it could
be tested more easily. Here are the goals:

* Bidirectional communication. Send and receive, with size hints, are
  both needed. Lumberjack requires that the receiver send acknowledgements.
* In test suite, no IO is performed.
* All errors are non-recoverable and imply that the connection must be
  shut down immidiately. In the test setting, the set of possible errors
  is smaller since network errors are not possible.
* In production, must be possible to log errors. The format of the logs
  must not be baked into the library.

With the Haskell library `pipes`, we might model this system with:

    Proxy
      (Bytes,Int)                    -- send acknowledgement and request chunk
      Bytes                          -- recv message, pairs with send
      ()                             -- nothing comes in from downstream
      Message                        -- push messages to downstream
      (ExceptT (ParseError :|: e) m) -- may fail with parse errors, error type is extensible
      Void                           -- loops forever until error

I believe that this would work, but it's a little cumbersome that we
have to pair send and receive like this. Really, we would like to
just be able to do any number of send operations and then call
receive at a time of our choosing. Lets try a free monad instead:

    data Operation (a :: Type)
      = Send Bytes a
      | Receive Int (Bytes -> a)
      | Publish Message a
      | Throw ParseError a  // I think we could omit the second argument
    type Program m a = FreeT Operation m a
    interpretPure : Environment -> (forall m. Program m a) -> (Either ParseError a, List Message)
    interpretIO : (Message -> ExceptT e IO ()) -- what to do with messages
               -> Socket
               -> (forall m. Program m a)
               -> ExceptT (ParseError :|: SocketError :|: e) IO a

This is better. One nice thing about this (and the original) is that we do not
have to pass a logger to the interpretation function. We can only get away with
this because none of the unexceptional behavior here is worth logging. However,
we could write an interpreter that logged every send and receive. It's just not
likely to be useful.

Something bad about the above approach is the way that the message interpreter
has to be passed in and how its exceptions get glued on. If we do away with
the publish command entirely, we get this:

    data Operation (a :: Type)
      = Send Bytes a
      | Receive Int (Bytes -> a)
    type Program m a = FreeT Operation m a
    interpretPure : Environment -> (forall m. Program m a) -> a
    interpretIO : Socket
               -> (forall m. Program m (Either ParseError a))
               -> ExceptT (ParseError :|: SocketError) IO a

This is even better. What do we lose by getting rid of `Publish` though? Mostly,
we lose the ability to be intelligent about sending acknowledgements (batching
acknowledgements together). This happens because the `Program` must end by
produces a message for us. It is a trade worth thinking about, but what we
gain is an `interpretIO` that is less driven by callbacks. We also got rid
of `Throw` because we don't do any looping anymore and can just return the
error.

How about doing this kind of thing with a module system? Let's consider something
like SML but with Xavier Leroy's
[higher-order modules](https://people.mpi-sws.org/~dreyer/courses/modules/leroy95.pdf).
We need this for the monadic interface computation. 

    sig Action where 
      type m : Monad
      send : Bytes -{m}> Unit
      receive : Int -{m}> Bytes
    program : {m : Monad, a : Action where a.m = m} => Unit -{m}> (Result ParseError (List Message))
    program = do
      a.send ...
      bytes <- a.receive ...
      case parse bytes of
        Failure x -> Failure x
        Success r -> do
          a.send ... -- acknowledge
          Success r

The `program` is simplified a bit. There actually needs to be additional calls
to receive, and the buffer size depends on the initial result. But, the idea
is that if we have a module implementing `Action`, we should be good to go.

    module TestAction where
      type m = StateReader -- something that tracks how to respond based on context
    module IOAction where
      type m = IOErrorReader SocketError Socket
        -- ^ Socket errors can happen on send and receive. These short circuit.

At this point, this whole thing looks a lot like a resumable parser except
with the ability to send information back upstream. As a result, it has
slightly better control over buffering. This kind of library would also be
suitable for an HTTP request-response application, and it could even support
pipelined requests. Note that `program` can be decompose into small parts. That
is, you could have something that just reads responses and acknowledges them.
Also, it is possible to combine different kinds of actions (lumberjack and
kafka for example) if the underlying monadic contexts match. The likelihood
of a match, however, is low. I probably need to read koka's docs again.

Koka defines the `state` effect like this:

    effect state<a>
      fun get() : a
      fun set( x : a ) : ()

And when you interpret `state`, the arrows in the types get annotated with
whatever effect you interpretted into. In the system I proposed above, this
would instead be:

    sig State (s : Type) where 
      type m : Monad
      get : Unit -{m}> a
      set : a -{m}> ()

Of course, `State` has a canonical interpretation, so it's a little silly to
represent it this way. The koka version of `Action` would be:

    effect action
      fun send(b : Bytes) : ()
      fun receive(n : Int) : Bytes

The big different is that `m` that gets plumbed through with a module system.
There is also a problem with the module-system approach when we go to combine
effects that need different `Reader`-style interpreters. Basically, we need
the type `m` in `TestAction` and `IOAction` to be allowed to grow into
something bigger. I'm not totally sure how to make this work, but I think
that (moving more in the direction of koka), we replace this:

    program : {m : Monad, a : Action where a.m = m} => Unit -{m}> (Result ParseError (List Message))

with this:

    program : Unit -{Action}> (Result ParseError (List Message))
    program2 : Unit -{Lumberjack,Output}> (Result ParseError Void)

Now, there is a natural place for set union of monadic effects to happen.
If we instead had:

    program2 : {m : Monad, a : Lumberjack where a.m = m, p : Output where p.m = m}
      => Unit -{m}> (Result ParseError Void)

We would be stuck when we picked intpretations where the underlying effects
did not match. What we need in this system is the ability to ask for
subsumption, but it's unclear where this should happen. Maybe in the
action itself:

    sig Action (n : Monad) where 
      type (m : Monad | m < n)
      send : Bytes -{m}> Unit
      receive : Int -{m}> Bytes

That's too weird though. Maybe the place for set union is like this:

    program2 : {a : Lumberjack, p : Output} => Unit -{a.m,p.m}> (Result ParseError Void)

That's actually not that bad, and it pushes the handling of set union
into type synthesis rather than type inference. We want this to work
like this:

            Reader LumberjackSocket + IO
    union   Reader OutputDescriptor + IO
    ==============================================================
            Reader LumberjackSocket + Reader OutputDescriptor + IO

This system is more verbose than koka since you have to name these
extra `m` variables, but I think that it has equal power. Plus, since
it's a module system, you can do all of the normal module system stuff
with it as well. But the type system does need to understand what
monadic arrows are. At the least, `Reader`, `State`, and `IO` need
to be built into the language, and then there needs to be some
kind of discharge option for `Reader` and `State` so that they
could become regular functions. This would be exposed to the user of
the language, and it would be used internally when lowering to an
IR. `IO` would not have this possibility, and the low-level IR would
need to understand that `IO` is special and prohibits reordering.
