# Sinking computation into allocation sites

When bump allocating a data constructor, it is not necessary to compute
all arguments before beginning to store them. Here is an example:

    let x = allocate Foo <a,b,c,d,e,f,g,h>

If we require everything to be sitting in a register before we start writing
anything to memory, we will add considerable register pressure for some of
the fields computed last. It would be preferrable to reserve the space up
front (adjusting the heap pointer and writing to the header word). Then,
any fields can be computed and written out immidiately after their computation
is complete. This only improves register pressure when the values written as
some of the fields are dead after `Foo` is allocated. I suspect that this
is a common case though. There are several cases to consider. What if the
field computation:

1. Is straight arithmetic? Simple. The computation does not mess with the
   heap pointer, so after calculating a field, it can just be written out.
2. Allocates a fixed amount? Also not difficult. Consolidate the heap checks,
   whatever form they take, bumping the heap pointer all the way down at
   once.
3. Allocates a bounded amount (by branching)? Similar. Just take the
   maximum possible allocated amount.
4. Allocates a variable amount. This is more tricky. I'm not sure how
   to deal with this.
4. Calls a non-allocating function? This is fine. Any non-allocating
   function promises that it does not modify the heap pointer.
5. Calls an allocating function? If the function allocates a bounded
   amount, I think this can be made to work. The difficulty is that
   the function body cannot be instructed to perform all heap-pointer
   accesses at an offset. So, the heap pointer must be adjusted before
   and after the function call. If the function allocates a variable
   amount, then this doesn't work.
