# Bidirectional typing without first-class functions

I've got some thoughts on this on a
[GitHub comment](https://github.com/ollef/Bidirectional/issues/5#issuecomment-901139056),
but here are the other thoughts.

Users need to be able to talk about terms with free variables.
It's uncommon to do this, but it is important to be able to do
it. If you cannot do this, you risk loss of sharing. For example:

    myList : forall a. List (Either a Int)
    myList = Cons (Right 5) Nil

It's important to be able to write that and then be able to `Cons`
different `Left` types onto it.

I like sythesis more than checking, although checking is necessary
for things like function arguments.

Maybe a type system could have two different `forall`s: one for
data and one for functions. This way, it would be clear what's
on the inside, and we could avoid articulation. If we get rid of
articulation, I think we can get rid of scope markers as well,
and then we can use a more simple implementation that just uses
mutation to solve.

I need something more clean for solving types:

    data Type
      = TypeVariable !TypeId
      | TypeBase !Base
      | TypeForallData !TypeId !Type
    data Var
      = Solved Type
      | Unsolved
    type World = MutableDisjointMap Type

The advantage of this is that you never have to do any substitutions.
The disadvantage is that when you use the `union` operator to solve a
variable, you have to make sure that one of the two is an unsolved
variable. But I don't think that is difficult to arrange. This is
a somewhat custom disjoint set data structure. Also, for ease of
implementation, I would probably just initialize to 1000 elements and
then throw an error if we ended up dealing with too many metavariables.
That way, growing the array is not a concern. This could always be
remedied later.

# Refined type signature for array insert

I think it would look like this:

    insert : forall a.
      (v : Vector a, i : Int, a) | i <= v.length
      ->
      (w : Vector a) | w.length = v.length + 1
