# Immix and Reference Counting

In [Taking Off the Gloves with Reference Counting Immix](http://users.cecs.anu.edu.au/~steveb/pubs/papers/rcix-oopsla-2013.pdf),
Shahriyar, Blackburn, Yang, and McKinley claim that they have closed the
gap between reference counting and tracing collection. It's an interesting
read. It's also a somewhat complicated system. It only tracks low reference
counts, falling back to tracing to correct counts for objects with counts
higher than 8. It actually needs tracing for three different things:

* Correcting counts for objects with counts that have gone too high
* Collecting cycles
* Defragmentation

I don't particularly like the need for tracing. In the setting I'm
thinking of (a strict functional language), cycle detection is not
needed (programmer is responsible for not creating them). There are
other ways to handle high counters, so tracing isn't needed there.
But then there is defragmentation. And Immix RC really needs tracing for
defragmentation. My understanding is that, to prevent fragmentation,
you've basically got two options:

1. Copying collection (Immix RC does this)
2. Fine-grained allocation pools (Ueno's nonmoving collector does this)

There is a bonus third option, which is using something like MESH where
you play games with virtual memory, but this seems like something that
you only bring in as a last resort and in niche circumstances. And it
only works with fine-grained allocation pools.

# Simple Size-Class Allocator with Bitmaps

What if you simplify Ueno's collector by making the tree height 1? So,
every segment just has 64 entries. You still moving full segments
"to the left" of allocation cursor, but there is no tree anymore. Would
this perform better or worse than the allocator described in the paper?
My hunch is that it should perform worse. Otherwise, Ueno would've have
come up with a more complicated solution. But, hardware has changed
somewhat since then. Notably, Ueno assumes bit scans on 32-bit registers.
Today, 64-bit registers are the norm. Another possibility is using
256-bit or 512-bit registers instead. Branchless CLZ and friends are
[slow but not that slow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/49213611/count-leading-zeros-in-m256i-word)
on 256-bit registers. I wonder if you could get away with a segment
list like this:

                           active
                             *
     A  <->  B  <->  C  <->  D  <->  E  <-> ...   | Segments
    250     252     235     105     107           | Live objects

That is, choose some cutoff like 80% or maybe 90% for how many slots must
be free before the segment is recycled. If you are able to use 256-bit
registers as masks, you would often be able to perform 100 or more
(branchless) allocations before you had to find a new block.
