# ANF Soup for Strict Language

I read [FIRM - A Graph-Based Intermediate Representation](https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.716.5826&rep=rep1&type=pdf)
recently. FIRM is kind of like LLVM, but the inside of a basic block is a
graph. Maybe there are other differences, but that the main one I've noticed,
and it's the one that FIRM's team draws attention to on the
[libFirm vs LLVM page](https://pp.ipd.kit.edu/firm/LLVM.html).

To me, what's cool about FIRM is that, as a graph-based IR, it does a good
job capturing the evaluation-order-independence of statements. I wonder if
this idea can be applied to lambda calculus IRs. For example, consider
this expression in a strict lambda calculus IR:

    let { w = baz a
        ; x = foo w
        ; y = bar c
        ; z = w + y
        }
     in case x of ...

Assuming that nothing is going to be able to float down into the `case`
statement, these let-bound identifier can be partially ordered. It looks
like this:

       w   y
     /  \ /
    x    z
     \  /
     case

This is directed with the arrows pointing down. Techically, the `case` node
would be pointed to by everything, but the edges connecting it to `w` and `y`
can be erased (something about dominance, not sure). What this graph
tells us is what scheduling options are available. Any traversal that visits
every node once is valid. We may have any of:

    wxyz
    wyzx
    wyxz
    ywzx
    ywxz

Is this information useful though? What advantage would this kind of
representation provide?

* When lowering to make arena reservations explicit, we could choose the order
  that resulted in the fewest number of reservations. If one of the operations
  calls a function that performs an unknown amount of allocation, that should
  ideally be done first or last, not between the operations that perform a
  bounded amount on allocation.
* If anything is reduced to a constant by constant folding, it can be pulled
  into its use sites. For this to work, any references to `w`, `x`, `y`, and
  `z` (like those in the body of the `case`) would need to be represented by
  edges as well. Granted, a graph-based representation is not required for
  this, but it makes it a little bit easier.
* As with FIRM, copy propogation is easy. So is dead code elimination (although
  be careful above only removing things known to terminate). Also, CSE is
  easy.

Most of these are things that were already possible without a graph-based
representation. The only one that really needs the graph is the arena
reservation analysis. So I am not totally convinced that anything is gained.
If we got rid of strictness, then some cool stuff would happen. Notably,
let bound expressions would inherently float into the right place. For example,
in the expression considered above, `x` would naturally float into the
`case` statement. But, getting rid of strictness makes thunks essential, and
I would like to avoid thunks. 

As an alternative to having `case` depend on `x`, we could have expressions
inside of `case` depend on `x`. The `case` itself would depend on the
aggregate of everything inside of itself. For a strict language, this
might make floating let bindings into `case` expressions easier.
(It is still necessary to check that the RHS is guaranteed to terminate).

I came up with two ideas for nonstrict evaluation without using thunks,
but neither of them work in every situation. The first idea is to perform
a transformation like this:

    let x = fizz a
        y = buzz b
     in case y of
          0 -> x + 5
          1 -> 42
          2 -> x + 7
    ==>
    let y = buzz b
        x = case y of {0,1 -> fizz a; _ -> undefined}
     in case y of
          0 -> x + 5
          1 -> 42
          2 -> x + 7

In this case, `x` is now only computed when needed. However, this strategy
breaks down when you try to do something like:

    let x = fizz a
        y = buzz b
        z = case x of
          0 -> y
          1 -> 16
          2 -> y + 5
     in case y of
          0 -> x + 5
          1 -> 42
          2 -> z + 7

If we try to do the above transformation again, we find that `x` depends on
`y` (as before), but now `y` depends on `x` because of the definition of `z`.
So, that doesn't work.

The other idea is to duplicate code to solve the problem. The trick is to
track, in each path, whether or not something has already been used:

     in case y of
          0 -> compute(x) THEN x + 5
          1 -> 42
          2 -> compute(x), compute(z) THEN z + 7

That example didn't work very well. Let's try another one:

    let x = fizz a
        y = buzz b
        z = case x of
          0 -> y
          1 -> 16
          2 -> y + 5
        w = case y of
          0 -> x + 5
          1 -> 42
          2 -> z + 7
        q = bang c
     in case q of
          0 -> w + z
          1 -> x
          2 -> y + z
          3 -> z
          4 -> w

What we want to do is first replace all RHSs with function application:

    let x = fizz a
        y = buzz b
        z = zf(x,y) -- family is strict in x
        w = wf(x,y,z) -- family is strict in y
        q = bang c

Notice that `zf` and `wf` are families of functions. Some functions in
these families are not strict in certain arguments. Now, we can rewrite
the `case` as:

     in case q of
          0 ->
            mut x, z;
            let w = wf(x,y,z)
            if NULL(z)
              then let z = zf(x,y) in w + z
              else w + z

I feel like I'm not getting anywhere with this. It doesn't seem like it
works at all.

One last thought. The loose ordering of in-place mutation (updates to
memory cells) is one of the things that FIRM's sea-of-nodes approach handles
well. This could perhaps be exploited for the `ST` equivalent in a language
that distinguishes pure and impure expressions. For example, in this:

    foo.age := 55
    foo.name := "Jane"
    foo.health := 100
    

The updates all target distinct memory locations. The order independence is
not originally known, but it is easy to figure out that these do not overlap
in the high-level phase. Originally, we might have:

               |
    +---------------------+
    | set(foo,Foo.age,55) |
    +---------------------+
               |
    +--------------------------+
    | set(foo,Foo.name,"Jane") |
    +--------------------------+
               |
    +-------------------------+
    | set(foo,Foo.health,100) |
    +-------------------------+
               |

Since all three are updates to the same object, an optimization pass could
rearrange them as:

                                        |
               +------------------------+---------------------------+
               |                        |                           |
    +---------------------+  +--------------------------+  +-------------------------+
    | set(foo,Foo.age,55) |  | set(foo,Foo.name,"Jane") |  | set(foo,Foo.health,100) |
    +---------------------+  +--------------------------+  +-------------------------+
               |                        |                           |
               +------------------------+---------------------------+
                                        |

The bottom is what FIRM calls a "Sync" node. In the high-level IR, there
is nothing powerful that we can do as a result of this decomposition.
Any kind of "redundant set-get analysis" would work even if the memory
operations were serialized. However, what the graph representation does
give us in a way to communicate this information to lower-level IR.
Imagine one more like FIRM, a sea-of-nodes that deals doesn't know anything
about objects. This would become:
    
                                     |
               +---------------------+---------------------+
               |                     |                     |
    +---------------+  +-----------------------+  +----------------+
    | set(foo,0,55) |  | set(foo,8,0xD54F001B) |  | set(foo,4,100) |
    +---------------+  +-----------------------+  +----------------+
               |                     |                     |
               +---------------------+---------------------+
                                     |

And now the first and last nodes could be combined into a single 8-byte store.
The higher-level representation provided more opportunity to detect order
independence, and the lower-level representation provided an opportunity
to actually exploit this. To give an example of where the higher-level
representation has a huge advantage, consider the assignments `Foo.age`
and `Bar.temperature`. These cannot possibly refer to the same location.
Consequently, they can be done in either order. We know that they cannot
be at the same memory address because they are different types. But at the
low level, this is all gone. We might only see `x[4] := 17, y[8] := 13`,
and in that situation, we really don't know if `x` and `y` overlap.

So then, I guess what I'm wondering is if there is a way to perform
all of the interesting high-level optimizations in a sea-of-nodes
representation, turn that into a low-level sea-of-nodes representation,
and then squeeze out a few remaining optimization opportunities. At
some point in compilation, the nursery pointer must become explicit.
Similarly, at some point, the stack pointer must become explicit. Although
maybe if GC used a shadow stack, the stack pointer could be kept implicit,
and a shadow stack could be implemented, and then LLVM could handle the
dirty details of the actual stack. The stack pointer would stay implicit
this way. However, you would need some kind of `alloca` node so you could
set up a shadow stack frame inside of each stack frame. This node would
have really good non-aliasing guarantees, but you wouldn't really need
them because this would be the last pass you would do before handing
things over to LLVM.
