# Different Language for Bounds-Checked Arithmetic

I was writing some code to concatenate Apache Arrow VarBin buffers, and
I ended up writing this little comment to help me make sense of what I
was doing:

    for i in [0:m]: (inclusive upper bound)
      dst[i] = src[i]
    for i in [0:n): (exclusive upper bound)
      dst[i+m+1] = src[i+1] + k

This isn't a programming language. It was just to help me. And it helped
uncover a mistake that I had made. The actual code is much verbose because
it has proofs about things being in bounds, and all the element are finite
numbers with a bound of `k + j + 1` (j is not used in the pseudocode).

This got me thinking about two things:

1. It is important, in a low level language, to have some way to express
   finite numbers and ensure that array indices are in bounds.
2. It is cumbersome, in many situations, to assemble these proofs by hand.
   It is so cumbersome that the proofs themselves (proofs about indices being
   in bounds) can obscure other mistakes in the code.

The second observation is why there are things like Liquid Haskell, Dafny, and
other systems built on SMT solvers. But use of these is not widespread.

I think a lot about the language that I want to build, and this particular
issue is always something that makes me uneasy. I don't want undefined
behavior, and I want to give users a way to write high-performance code that
isn't littered with implicit bounds checking everywhere. But having a proof
language (and consequently dependent types) complicates the language. Before,
I have always thought about integrating all of it into a single system. But
what I am thinking about now is having the language that deals with arrays
and finite numbers be a separate language. It would still be possible to
communicate between the two languages, but it would not be necessary to support
all the same features across both languages.

For the more primary language, this is helpful. It means I could leave
all of the bounds-checking stuff out and then add it later when I needed it. 
For the bound-checked language, there are at least two options. One of them
is to have it be strictly more powerful than the high-level language. That is,
it could have everything and more. But this might not be desirable. Envisioning
compilation as a hierarchy, we could put the bounds-checked language below the
high-level language, or we could put it beside it. Or we could have two languages,
one below and one beside.

What could a "beside" option look like? This could be something where we give
up some forms of expressivity (e.g. polymorphism, regions, user-defined data
types) and pick up a type system that looks more like something equipped with
an SMT solver. Ultimately, everything would have to get lowered to some kind
of system with explicit proof term, and that would be the "below" language.

Or maybe the "beside" language can do everything that the original language
can do, but it's got all the SMT solver stuff added to it. But then why would
we even need two languages?

One example of orthogonal approaches to the same problem is subtyping.
In a language with proofs and dependent type, we might write either
of these:

    (numbers : Array (n : Int, Gte 0 n))
    (numbers : Array Int, proof : All numbers (Gte 0))

It works out a little better to keep the proof on the outside because that
lets you combine multiple proofs about the array. But keeping the proof on
the inside is more convenient in a language with subtyping. Consider something
like this in a language with subtyping and without dependent types:

    Array (Int | >= 0)

If we need to be able to say that our elements are greater than (or less than)
some value that is only known at runtime, then we need dependent types, and
everything gets more tricky. But even without whole-hog dependent types, we
can express something useful. It's nice to know that a number cannot be less
than zero. There are a lot of situations where we expect this. For example:
allocating an array (no negative length), indexing into an array, scheduling
a timer that fires in the future.

We could work with proofs one way in one system and a different way in
another system. Maybe the "beside" language would only support type
constructors whose arguments were ordinary types (without proofs).

I need to think about this more. What I like about this idea is that I might be
able to ignore the difficulties with supporting high-performance functions
that operate on arrays. And I could come back and tackle that problem later
in an orthogonal system.

What I'm not interested in is a system that encourages users to manually
perform formal verification. I'm fine with computers searching for proofs and
assembling them, so it is necessary to have a language at some level that
supports this. I just don't want people building proofs. In the domains that
I've been exposed to, humans building programs in this way is a dead end.
