# Mutation, Regions, Linear Types

I've been trying to figure out how to piece together mutation, regions, and
linear types. Here are my observations:

* Linear types are useful for dealing with region capabilities (from Linear
  Regions Are All You Need), which make it possible to use a direct style
  (i.e. ANF) when working with regions.
* Linear types are a poor fit for representing mutability. They work well when
  dealing with a single mutable object (with immutable fields). However, they
  are incapable of elegantly handling nested mutation.
* Linear types are a good interface for mutable high-level constructs like
  maps, but the internals cannot use them. With sufficient abstraction, it
  might be possible to provide a pleasant interface with linear types that
  hides the mutation used by the implementation.
* Linear types make it possible to enforce a variant that GHC's implementation
  of ST relies on. In GHC, `ST s a` is roughly: `State s -> (State s, a)`, but
  what we actually want is a guarantee that the "state token" is only consumed
  a single time.

Let's try building out a low-level (ANF) language that handles mutation:

    new    : Unit -> 竏ピ. MutCap s {1}
    delete : MutCap s {1} -> Unit
    freeze : (MutCap s {1}, MutableObject s) -> Object // destroys the capability
    alloc  : MutCap s {1} -> (MutableObject s, MutCap s {1})
    write  : (MutCap s {1}, MutableObject s, Field, Value) -> MutCap s {1}
    read   : (MutCap s {1}, MutableObject s, Field) -> (Value, MutCap s {1})

This looks like it works fine. Something that's more clear in this presentation
than in GHC's high-level interface is that a `MutCap` only sequences accesses
to data that is tagged with the same `s` type. It's possible to call `new` any
number of times and construct multiple objects simultaneously. There is no
ordering guarantee between any such objects.

One way to simplify this is to just have a single `MutCap` for the whole
program. This approach oversequentializes, and it forces the user and the
compiler to assume that every function might mutate data. I don't think
this is worth pursuing. This is basically how SML works.

I think that we can wrap up phantom-tagged state nicely like this:

    type MutableMap s = ...
    type Map = 竏ピ. (MutCap s {1}, MutMap s)
    insertMutable : (MutCap s {1}, MutMap s, Key, Value) -> (MutCap s {1}, MutMap s)
    insertLinear  : (Map {1}, Key, Value) -> Map {1}

That should work. Notice that the `MutMap` inside of `Map` is what GHC Haskell
would call "unrestricted". Even though it shows up inside tuple that is
consumed linearly, it does not have to be consumed linearly.

Now, let's try to make the whole map live in the same region:

    type MutableMap s @r = ...
    type Map = 竏ピ. 竏ビ. (MutCap s {1}, RegCap r {1}, MutMap s @r)
    insertMutable : (MutCap s {1}, RegCap r {1}, MutMap s, Key, Value) -> (MutCap s {1}, RegCap r {1}, MutMap s @r)
    insertLinear  : (Map {1}, Key, Value) -> Map {1}

We could build something similar where the region is exposed but the `MutCap`
is hidden:

    insertLinear  : (Map@r {1}, Key, Value) -> Map@r {1}

Tracking the region capability and the mutable capability separately is
frustrating. Let's examine how they relate to one another:

* The mutation capability is for sequencing accesses (read/write) to related
  mutable data.
* The region capability is for restricting allocation and read accesses to
  prevent them from happening after a region has been deallocated.

Both of these deal with read accesses, but the capabilities have fundamentally
different purposes. Consider that any of these may happen:

* Two unrelated mutable data structures might exist in the same region
* A single mutable data structure might span multiple regions

I really don't like having the `s` type variable pollute everything, but
I'm not sure that there is a better way to do this. We could attempt to
unify the two. For example, we could make it so that a region capability
includes the ability to modify any mutable data that lives in the region.
This results in oversequentialized computation. A more serious drawback
is that it makes it impossible to build mutable data structures that are
each unrelated objects. An even more serious drawback is that it does not
admit a `freeze` operation. I think that is serious enough to put an end
to considering it.

# Why Coalesce Mutation Capabilities

In theory, every allocated object could have its own mutation capability.
There are two reasons that we might want objects to share mutation
capabilities:

1. Aliasing. We cannot existentially pack the same capability twice because
   that would be nonlinear consumption.
2. Nonaliasing Proof Burdens. For something like B-Trees, we don't actually
   end up with aliasing, but its impossible to implement efficiently if we
   prove that there is no aliasing. (Or at least, it's impossible to do with
   the tools that I'm willing to use.)

# Parsing into Regions: Succeed or Destroy

When we parse something, it's often nice to allocate upfront and then fill
in the data structure as we go. If we do it this way, we are less likely
to end up spilling the values to the stack. Consider this function:

    parseFoo : (RegCap r {1}, Handle r, Bytes) -> (RegCap r {1}, Result Error Foo@r)

An implementation of `parseFoo` will end up waiting until the last moment
possible to allocate the `Foo`. It has to because we want to make sure that
we do not allocate memory that becomes unreachable. However, if we instead
have:

    parseFoo : (RegCap r {1}, Handle r, Bytes) -> Result Error (RegCap r {1}, Foo@r)

Now we are in a better position. It's safe to allocate the `Foo` early
because the "fail" path includes deallocating the entire region.

# Ergonomics for Read-Only Values

In the above example for `parseFoo`, the `Bytes` argument does not include
a region. I need to think about how to do this. I do not want to burden the
user with a region for the bytes (and a capability for that region). Maybe
some kind of second-class-value system would work. Like if we could get some
bytes in a region and then treat it as a second-class value for a while.
That's not going to work.



