# Things I Learned About Terminal Emulators

Here are other ideas to look into:

* Write a terminal emulator only supporting vt220 control sequences
* epapertty project
* screendump (program)
* man pages for vcsa. I tried this one out. You can only do this on
  systems without a graphical interface. You need to boot into recovery
  mode or use the server version of a distro. This works really well
  though. It does not include any newline characters. It is just space
  characters all the way across. 
* tmux capture-pane command
* Pango. Turns text into images.
  Example: `pango-view --font=mono -qo tmuxpane.bmp tmuxpane.txt`
* Combining pango with a vcsa dump, we need to set `--width=600`
  and `--wrap=char`. That's just with the default DPI though.
  There are a lot more settings that can be tweaked.
* This command: `stty cols 60 rows 20`. I think that it is possible
  to make this change on startup with Kernel ModeSettings (KMS).
  I have not figured out how to do this though.

# More Things I Learned About ePaper

I cannot really figure out what's going on with drivers for these things.
It's still very messy. There are more examples of Waveshare displays working
than there are of Pervasive displays, so I think I should try using a
Waveshare display first.

This model is inexpensive and should do what I want: Waveshare SKU 22698

Here are some notes:

* Use this repo: https://github.com/waveshareteam/e-Paper - There is
  an older one that everything links to, but it's a dead link now.
* Look at the file `EPD_2in13_test.c` in the e-Paper repo. It has an
  example of partial refresh.
* The python code does not have any examples of partial refresh. That's
  fine. The C code is not really any more difficult to read. Also, there
  is already example code for reading from a bitmap file and displaying
  it on the device.
* The way the e-Paper repo is structured is wild. There is a copy of
  every file for every different display size.
* When looking at Waveshare products, be careful to check that a particular
  display supports fast update. Some do, and some do not. Also, I noticed
  that a lot of their larger displays (7in and up) have 4-color greyscale
  support. They do not make larger displays that are just black and white.
  Actually, SKU 21393 is 7in and is black and white, but it also has a
  layer of glass on it.
* Pervasive does make 7in and 9in displays that are just black and white.
  But they do not document how long full updates or fast updates are
  supposed to take.
* Actually, all of the HD displays have really good refresh times, and
  I can tell from their demo code that they support partial refreshes.
  Look [here](https://www.waveshare.com/wiki/6inch_HD_e-Paper_HAT) for
  more details about this. The repository for these is IT8951-ePaper.
* Here's a blog post where someone uses the IT8951:
  https://medium.com/@pvginkel/controlling-waveshare-e-paper-displays-using-an-esp32-s3-pico-and-lvgl-c6b93037977b
* According to that blog post, the IT8951 has 32MB RAM. Suppose that we
  render characters on the display at 12px by 24px. That is 288 bits per
  character, which is 36 bytes per character. We do not need every ascii
  character, but let's say that we are doing all 128 as an upper bound.
  That's 4608B, which is not bad. The tricky thing is that people can
  easily type several characters in a second, so we need to be able to
  push a series of several characters to the screen in a single update.
  The function `EPD_IT8951_1bp_Multi_Frame_Write` copies from host memory
  to the IT8951. That's no good because it's slow. The implementation
  of it calls `EPD_IT8951_HostAreaPackedPixelWrite_1bp`, which ends up
  calling `DEV_SPI_WriteByte` in a loop (although this is able to write
  an entire byte at a time, so it's not that bad).
* There is a good example project at https://github.com/pvginkel/it8951-esp32
* Look at https://github.com/waveshare/IT8951/blob/master/IT8951.c
* I keep thinking about being able to have a tile map of characters on
  the IT8951, but it seems like there is no way to do this. The burst
  instructions cannot be used to copy from the SDRAM on the chip to itself.
  They are only useful for copying data to and from the host, but it is
  a slow copy.
* Here is what I think might actually work. On the host, keep track of
  what characters are currently in the buffer on the IT8951, but keep
  track of them in a very course-grained way, as characters, not as
  pixels. When the virtual console changes, take the difference and
  only send that difference to the IT8951. If three characters have
  been typed, this will be a small amount of data, and the transfer
  over SPI will not be too bad, and we can perform a partial refresh.
  This does not require preloading ascii characters onto the IT8951.
  It also keeps the entire target buffer on the IT8951 up-to-date all
  the time. So whenever a full refresh is needed, it's easy to do.
  Still, it would be much nicer to do a simple refresh.
* Here is another blog: https://iancarey.ie/blog/epapertext
* Waveshare's documentation indicates that it is necessary to perform
  a full update after about 5 partial updates. Here's what they say:
  "Users who use partial flashing should pay attention to performing
  a full flashing operation to remove the ghosting after refreshing
  several times, otherwise, the ghosting problem will become more and
  more serious, or even damage the screen". I'm not sure this is true.
  GoodDisplay has instructions at https://www.good-display.com/news/134.html
  that encourage full refreshes occassionally, but there is no hint
  that the ghosting will damage the display.
* [This repo](https://github.com/bitbank2/bb_epaper) controls ePaper
  displays from several vendors directly. It is more low level and does
  not use the IT8951. It does not currently support any of the HD displays
  that Waveshare makes. There is a lot of good information in here though.

Concluding thoughts. I'm thinking more about how an application like
vim might work on an ePaper display. Partial updates would probably
work fine for updating text on a single line. Any time you move around
in a document, you need a full refresh. Moving the cursor around is
annoying though. What would be nice is a transparent OLED display (monochrome)
in front of the ePaper. This could be used for a cursor and for selection
areas. I cannot find any transparent OLED displays that are an appropriate
size though. There are some that are less than 2in, and there are huge
displays for commercial use.

I'm done thinking about this for a while.
