# A Module System With Separate Compilation

This is a description of a way to add a module system to the programming
language I have been thinking about. This preserves separate compilation,
which means that it is unable to inline tiny functions. This makes the
module system bad at things like abstracting over arithmetic. The performance
penalty would make it unusable in that case. But it would still work well
for abstracting over things like file descriptors. Here is the plan.

## Part A: Function Wrappers

All functions have wrappers that make them more homogeneous. In a wrapper,
every argument is passed on the stack and is padded to 16 bytes. Return
values must also be returned to the stack. I'm not sure whether or not
there are any C calling conventions that have the exact behavior that I
want for return values. Normally, C compilers return large structs by
passing an additional pointer argument to a function. I want the caller
instead infer this pointer based on either the frame pointer or the stack
pointer. It would be nice if the wrapper tail called the real function.
Then, in the common case where we are calling a known function, we can
call the inner function instead with the nicer calling convention.

One tricky thing about this is that I'm not sure how a tail-called inner
function can correctly return a value. If we have a ton of control over
compilation, we could instead implement this as a single function with
multiple entry points. Then we have a nice stable frame pointer throughout
the entire function. Actually, nevermind. We don't need that. Tail calls
already leave the frame pointer alone.

The notable codegen drawback to this whole thing is that values have to
be returned on the stack, and they are returned on the stack regardless
of whether or not we are calling the nice version of the function. If we
don't make this concession, we cannot tail call into the inner function.

## Part B: Environments

A function defined inside a module functor accepts an additional argument:
the environment. This environment includes all of the arguments passed to
the module functor. This includes both runtime type information (for abstract
type instantiations) and pointers to functions. I'm not sure how the
environment should be manipulated in certain situations. When we make a
call from one function in a module functor to another, we just need to
pass it the same environment. That's easy. But sometimes, a module functor
can instantiate a different module functor in its body using only a subset
of its arguments, and that's tricky. OCaml has figured this out though, so
there must be a way to do it. I think I see a way. It should be possible
to completely build out all of the environments at load time. This may
lead to some amount of duplication, but I'm not concerned. Also, we could
shift some of this to compile time, which helps a bit with deduplication,
but again, it's not a big deal.

## Analysis

A module system implemented this way has two characteristics that stand out:

1. Calls to abstract functions are guaranteed to incur a performance hit. Any
   abstract function calls cannot be inlined, and all arguments to such a
   function are pushed to the stack.
2. This is similar to how higher-order functions are often implemented. The
   differences are: there are no closures here (only top-level functions),
   type abstraction is supported.

What situations is this good for?

* Abstracting POSIX 
* Code that dispatches differently for unencrypted and encrypted sessions

What is it not good for? Situations where the performance hit would matter
a lot:

* Swapping out the implementation of an unordered map
* Abstractions related to monoids or collections (i.e. `Foldable`)
