# Disadvantages of Monomorphization

Monomorphization is a conceptually simple solution to the problem of
compiling polymorphic code. However, it comes with several drawbacks:

* Bigger binaries. I think this disadvantage is overstated, but I'm listing
  it anyway. If you have lots of copies of a non-performance-critical function,
  you get a bloated binary without any performance gains.
* More complicated compilation model. With a finite number of instantiations,
  separate compilation is still possible. But with an infinite number of
  instantiations, separate compilation is not possible. Usually there
  are an infinite number of instantiations. Separate compilation is desirable
  because it's obvious what needs to be rebuilt. If a function changes
  in any way imaginable but the type signature stays the same, then we
  just recompile that one function and rerun the linker.
* Poor interop with C/Zig/Rust/ASM. Suppose that some of your primops are
  written in a lower-level language. If the primop operates on something
  polymorphic, you end up needing a separate instantiation of it for each
  type. And if there are an infinite number of instantiations, well, I'm
  not even sure what you do. Maybe generate them on demand or something.
  Rust and Zig both support polymorphism, so this might work ok in those
  settings, but for C or ASM, you'd need to roll your own codegen.

# Runtime Representation of Regions

One odd feature of the two big moderns ISAs, x86-64 and ARMv8, is that
they have good support for both 32-bit words and 64-bit words. On 64-bit
systems, memory addresses are 64 bits. We can think of the high 32 bits
as being the region and the low 32 bits as being an offset into the region.
The lowest bytes in a region (maybe the first 64 bytes) should be reserved
as metadata.

Sorry, I'll come back to this later.
