# Regions, Offsets, Memory Mappings

One difficulty that I have found with regions is trying to accomplish both of
these goals:

1. Boxed data is represented by offsets (not pointers) so that data can
   copied cheaply between processes or even loaded from disk with `mmap`.
2. The pages backing allocations should be reused promptly after a region
   is deallocated.

Here are some things that can help:

* Knowing when it is no longer possible to allocate into a region. This
  makes it possible to use the space immidiately following the region
  as a new region. It might be possible to track a read counter and
  a write counter separately for this purpose.
* Relocating small regions. This can only be done when there is a single
  reference to the region. I am not sure how often this is useful. The
  purpose of this is to free up a larger contiguous address space.
* Being able to designate an upper bound on a region's size. It is not
  typically possible to do this. This possibility arises when decoding
  data or performing certain transformations. This makes it possible
  to keep a much larger number of regions live at the same time.
* Noncontiguous regions that overlap with one another. This reduces
  the capacity of the overlapped regions, and it makes it more difficult
  to serialize them. With 32-bit offsets, it becomes difficult to decide
  which regions should overlap. Is the user in control of this? Or does
  a runtime make the decision? Maybe this should be the default, and
  contiguous regions (that support serialization) should be opted into.
  I think this strategy has some real merit to it. If we required
  8-byte alignment for non-array data, we could address 32GiB of data.

The last bullet point seems like a winner. Something super nice about
this approach is that, in the common case, we can arrange free blocks
as a LIFO queue (a stack). This improves the likelihood that a recently
touched block will be reused before dropping out of a memory cache.

If the user wants a truly contiguous region, one that has 4GB (or maybe
32GB) of virtual address space all to itself, they have to ask for it.
Such a region can be serialized and then loaded into another program
with `mmap`. This case is less common, but it can still be supported.
