# Abandoning Relocatable Data

I have decided that relocatable data is not important enough to justify all
of the difficulties that it comes with. Here are several problems that I have
run into:

* It is unacceptable to map and unmap memory every time a region is created
  or destroyed. We need to have one big piece of memory that is cut up into
  blocks, and all regions use this same memory. But if we do this, we don't
  have regions that are truly contiguous anymore.
* For certain deployment models (cloud-based stuff like AWS), it's not even
  possible to use `mmap` to treat disk as an extension of memory.

If we just represent pointes as pointers (instead of as offsets), we benefit
in several ways:

* We can use an existing allocator like `mimalloc` instead of having to build
  an allocator from scratch.
* The instruction count when following a pointer is lower because we do not
  have to do arithmetic to add the offset to a base.

The drawback is that pointers have to be represented by 64 bits instead of
32 bits.

# Packing a Region and Object into a Single Pointer

I can't figure out a good way to do this, but I think it's pretty important. I
would like to be able to pack an object together with a region. The problem is
that the runtime has to be able to figure out where the reference count is.
In traditional RC systems, the RC is at the beginning of each object. But in
a system with regions, that's not true. It could be right before each object,
or it could be somewhere far away from the object. Here are the options that
I am aware of:

1. Track the pointer to the RC as an additional argument. This takes an
   additional 64 bits. Note: This could point into the object itself.
2. Put a pointer to the RC at the beginning of every object. This bloats
   every object. This doesn't have to be a full pointer though. We only
   need 32 bits for this.
3. Consult some kind of data structure that tells us where the RC for each
   object is. This probably involves multiple nonlocal accesses and is slow.
4. Use a bit in the pointer to indicate whether or not we are in a true region.
   If we are not in a true region, the counter comes right before the object.
   If we are in a true region, we find an indirection to the RC at the beginning
   of the block (not in the object). This wastes very little space. It's a little
   heavy on indirections in the uncommon case of packing a region. It is
   difficult to do something like this with existing allocators though.

All of these have drawbacks. The first option is the most simple, and it's
probably what I should do.

# Proof Terms vs ADT Hierarchies

At work, I was designing something recently and realized that I needed to
distinguish between "physical" and "virtual" fields. This distinction was
only useful in a few contexts though. In most places, a physical field
and a virtual field were treated the same way. Here's how I modeled this
in Haskell:

    data Field = Physical PhysicalField | Virtual VirtualField

The types `PhysicalField` and `VirtualField` are simple enum types. Something
that's bad about this solution is that, in every context where you do not
need the distinction, there's more noise than you want. For example, when
encoding a field, we don't care if it is physical or virtual. There is
another way to model this:

    data Field = ...
    data Representation = Physical | Virtual
    representation : Field -> Representation
    encode : Field -> String
    expandVirtual : (field : Field, representation field = Virtual) -> Expr

This requires dependent types, and it requires dealing with the decisions
dependent types ask you to make. But it's kind of nice for this. There
are other properties about fields. It is nice to be able to discuss the
types of fields (integer, string, etc.). Again, we don't need this everywhere,
but it's helpful in some places.

# Hosting DSLs

If you lean really hard into using tabs (or just whitespace) to group things
syntactically, you get a nice way to embed a DSL. The only trick is that the
DSL has to agree about what tabs are for.
