# Novel Strategy for Combining Polymorphism with RC

Two parts to this idea:

1. Polymorphic values are stored in vector registers. The type itself
   is represented as a size (or a mask) so that we can performed masked loads
   and stores correctly. This is the original idea that I could not figure out
   how to get working with RC.
2. Types are represented by an additional mask indicates which sub-values are
   reference counted. More specifically, this might work by using a vector 
   of masks, of scalars (for multiplication, probably 0, or 1), or of
   bit shifts.

The weird thing about this strategies is that you end up with a vector of
memory locations to counters, each of which need to be incremented or
decremented. We could do these steps: gather, increment, scatter. But
memory conflicts would cause the counters to be incorrect. We could
instead work through the elements one by one. For this, we would want
to represent the type as a GPR instead of a mask register. Then, we could
work our way through the bits that were set and update counters one-by-one.
This is probably the best approach, but it means that we need the spill
the value to the stack or (even better) reuse the representation of it
that's on the heap. I've looked around, and it seem like x86 doesn't
have good options for extracting from the ymm and zmm registers.

The multi-pointer case is going to be extremely uncommon, so I think that
a simple loop should be fine. In fact, if we can arrange that the pointers
always come first, we can simplify and represent the RCed components of
the type as just a number instead of a mask. This means that a type would
be represented by two values at runtime:

1. The size in bytes (or a mask with `size` consecutive ones). This
   is capped at either 32 or 64.
2. The number of pointers. This is capped at either 4 or 8.

One last thought. This implementation is compatible with several RC
optimizations. If we want to wait until the end of a function to visit
all the binders, we can do that. The advantage we earn is that we might
be able to consolidate all of the pointer-count checks.
