# Misc Implementation Decisions

## Maximum Size of Value with Abstract Type

I think that it is best to cap the size of values to 128 bits. This size
is widely available on both x86 and ARM. Vector registers work differently
on RISC-V, but I think this should work out fine on that platform as well.

## Representation of Values Packed with a Region

My system has at least three kinds. The important ones to discuss here
are `*` (Star), `#` (Pound) and `□` (Box). Star is a subkind of Pound,
and we have the following type system for several builtins:

    At     : □ -> Region -> *
    Packed : □ -> *
    Option : # -> #
    Array  : * -> □
    List   : * -> □

Type variables usually have kind Star or Region. They cannot have kind
Pound because the types that inhabit Pound have nonuniform representation.
A type variable can have kind Box, but doing this is uncommon.

A value with an abstract type (a type variable) is represented by 128 bits.
A boxed value packed with its region (hiding the region) is represented
by 128 bits. The first 64 bits are the beginning of the region, and the
next 64 bits are the pointer to the boxed value. I wanted to squeeze this
into 64 bits total instead, but it's difficult to do this. The region base
is guaranteed to be 16-byte aligned. There are only 2^48 usable addresses
on most systems, so we need 48 bits minus 4 bits equals 44 bits for the
base address. And that only leaves us with 20 bits for the offset of the
"root" object, which is not enough. We could use 48 bits for the pointer
to the object and use the remaining 16 bits to indicate how many low bits
have to be zeroed out to recover the base pointer to the region. This works,
but the C code used for this operation in quasi-UB territory. So I think
that the two-pointer solution is the best.

If we represent packed regions with two pointers (as suggested above),
it means that an abstract type implies at most one reference count, and
the reference count is predictably in the same position. We can simply
coerce the opaque 16-byte sequence to recover a pointer to some kind
of region metadata.

Where does this leave us when we try to pack an array with its region?
