# Regions With Subtyping and Refinements

## Difficulties With Traditional Region Type Systems

The traditional presentation of regions requires packing with an
existential quantifier when you want to talk about a value that
lives in an unknown region. For example, consider an array of
values that live in regions that are not known at compile time:

    myArray : Array (exists r. Foo@r)

With the right syntax, we can make this more palatable, but the
complexity of existential types is still there. We also end up with
two ways to type functions that consume a value in any region (and
do not reference that region elsewhere):

    // Note: Universal and existential quantifiers both introduce
    // a region variable that is reperesented at runtime.
    foo1 : forall r. Foo@r -> Bool
    foo2 : (exists r. Foo@r) -> Bool

There is a weird tension here. The first type signature is the natural
preference, but in the presence of a syntactic shorthand that hides the
existential quantifier, the second type signature is more pleasant for
the end user.

## Regions With Refinements

What if we constrain objects to regions through a refinement instead of
through a type constructor? That is, inhabitants of the type `Foo` are
each a value paired with a region. The type `Foo@r` has the same runtime
representation, but the region is constrained. Let's compare the two
choices again:

    // Note: Quantifiers introduce regions that do not exist at runtime.
    foo1 : forall r. Foo@r -> Bool
    foo2 : Foo -> Bool

Now `foo2` is the clear winner. We can implement `foo1` by just forgetting
the refinement on the argument and passing it to `foo2`:

    foo1 : forall r. Foo@r -> Bool
    foo1(x) = foo2(x)

We can also implement `foo2` using `foo1`, but it requires an existential
unpack operation.

Here are the disadvantages of this strategy:

* It is difficult to tell when reference counts should be incremented
  and decremented. I suspect that upcasting to forget a region refinement
  should cause an increment to happen, but I haven't thought it through
  all the way. This would be unfortunate since upcasts are usually
  assumed to be no-ops.
* The most simple implementation requires that every object that is
  a function argument be represented by two pointers instead of one.
  This is wasteful when multiple arguments use the same pointer. It is
  possible to improve this, but it makes the calling convention strange.
  By constrast, the traditional system suggest a calling convention that
  does not pass redundant information.
* There is a little bit of finagling that happens when we build an
  objects whose constituent members all live in the same region. We do not
  want to store a bunch of identical references to the region in the object.
  I don't think this is a big deal.

Here are the advantages of this strategy:

* It is possible to build an ordinary reference-counted runtime without
  regions first and then add regions later. To frame this differently, we
  could say that it is possible to understand the region system as an
  extension of a simpler system that lacks regions. The traditional system
  does not have this property because it has to encode all object types that
  do not track regions as an existential pair. This might not seem like a
  big deal, but for me, this property provides a more clear path forward
  to implementation.
* Lots of functions have much more natural signatures.
* We do not need existential packing since it is instead handled by
  upcasting to forget a region refinement.
* We are able to get rid of some of the situations where existential
  unpacking is needed but not all of them. In particular, if two or more
  of an object's member live in the same region (which may or may not be
  the same region that the object itself lives in), we may need to project
  the member in a way that lets us exploit this property. It would be
  nice to just drop this entirely through. There are certainly situations
  where tying members to the parent object's region is useful. And at some
  point, we need to be able to discard the refinement and "forget" the
  region annotation. (This happens with ordered maps for example.) So the
  existential unpack operation is actually essential. But it's not difficult
  to implement. It just brings the region's type variable into scope.
