# Unifying Treatment of Regions and Nonregions with Second Class Values

There are a lot of functions that take arguments that could either live
in a region or not in a region (i.e. the object is reference counted).
All POSIX functions that send data over a file descriptor are like this.
Also, a lot of string-manipulation functions work like this.

How can this possibility be expressed in a type system? Let's look at
what type `send` should have. Something like this:

    send : Fd -> Array U8 -> World -> (World, Errno)

We have two different array types. One of them is an array in a region
and one is an array that reference counted. It's difficult to stitch
a region type system together with a second-class value system. Region
annotations are typically part of types. But first/second class annotations
are on binders. It does not seem like there is a way to adapt the `TAPP`
rule from Gentrification Gone Too Far to do what I want to do with regions.

Maybe we don't need second-class values to do this. What if we have this
system:

    Counted     : Annotation
    Scoped      : Region -> Annotation
    Nonescaping : Annotation
    U8          : Type
    Array       : Annotation -> Type -> Type

No, this is not going to work either. We need to be able to upcast a counted
array and a scoped array to some common type. But then we could lose track
of objects in a region, and we might free the region too early.

What if we put region annotations on binders instead? Then we could do this:

    Counted     : Annotation
    Scoped      : Region -> Annotation
    Nonescaping : Annotation
    Counted    <: Nonescaping
    Scoped r   <: Nonescaping

That is, we are always free to forget that something is reference counted or
that it is associated with a region. Such a value cannot be returned from
a lambda, so it cannot live longer than it was supposed to live.

I still do not like this very much. Especially because the baseline that
we have to compare against is just doing this:

    send : {r : Region} -> Fd -> Array@r U8 -> World -> (World, Errno)

There is another possibility. We could have types that are not fully
first class types. I'm already planning on doing this for types like
`Option` and `Result` to get a reasonable upper bound on the size of
unpacked types. So maybe something like this works:

    Array       : Type -> RawType
    Counted     : RawType -> Type
    Scoped      : Region -> RawType -> Type
    Nonescaping : RawType -> LesserType

Both `Counted` and `Scoped` create a first-class type, but `Nonescaping`
creates something that cannot be used with type abstraction. It is possible
to prohibit values of these types from being returned from functions.

Still, this is not great. Maybe the best solution would be if there were
a way to pack an object and its region into a 64-bit word. Then we could
just use the RC array type in `send`, and there wouldn't be any RC updates
because the implementation of the function would not lower to code that
produced any of them.

What if pointers were real pointers but the upper bits were also a hint
about other things? The upper 24 bits, we basically have no control of.
But we can use `mmap` with `PROT_NONE` to easily get 1TB of virtual address
space, and then we really could embed additional information into these
low 40 bits. For example, what if bit 39 (the highest bit that we control)
was 0 for RC objects and 1 for objects in regions. This doesn't immidiately
do anything for us, but it could. In a multithreaded runtime, it can be
helpful to keep the reference counts apart from the objects.

What about this structure:

    rrrr_rrrr_rrrr_rrrr_yyyy_yyyy_1111_1111_zzzz_zzzz_zzzz_zzzz_zzzz_zzzz_zzzz_zzzz
      16 unavailable   | leave 8 |  ones   |     lower 32 bits of address

How do we turn an address into the address where the count is stored?
There's no way to do it because it has to be possible to reuse the
same block of memory in different regions. So the address itself cannot
possibly embed this information.

So the counter needs to be behind an indirection. We have to look the block
number up in a table somewhere. Lets say that blocks are 4KB each. To resolve
the address of the object to the address of the counter, we need to shift
right by 12 bits, then use this to look up the region in a table. But we need
the region index to be zero when we are looking up an RC object. How can we
accomplish that? Multiply by a bit (zero or one) to zero it out. How do we
get correct addresses for RC objects? We just look to the left of the address.
So, we have both of these:

    region_counters_base_addr + block_to_region_index[u32(addr >> 12)]
    addr - 4

How do we combine them?

    x = u32(addr >> 12)
    y = addr - 4
    addr[32] == 1 ? x : y

I don't love this, but it works.

The worst part of this is that I don't even really want to be able to
existentially pack regions. I just want to be able to share a code path
for RC byte arrays and region-resident byte arrays.

I think that the best solution is to just do the most simple thing:

    send : {r : Region} -> Fd -> Array@r U8 -> World -> (World, Errno)

But the slightly higher-level language would have it look like this
instead:

    send : Fd -> Array@? U8 -> World -> (World, Errno)
