# Refinements for Natural Numbers

I keep exploring this idea and then abandoning it. The disadvantage of
it is that it's not general enough to express everything, but the
advantage is that it is expressive enough to help in a lot of common
situations. Something that I want to avoid is having to propogate
propositional equality of natural numbers. This ends up messy, and the
system needs a solvers, and SMT solvers start looking tempting.

How should this system work? It must be possible to compare a value-level
integer against something that lives at the type level. Like this:

    sum : {n} -> Array n Int -> Int
    sum{n}(xs):
      loop(ix : Int | >= 0, acc : Int):
        if ix < n:
          then (ix : >=0, <n): loop(ix + 1, acc + index(xs,ix)
          else: acc
      loop(0,0)

This works fine. Notice that in the `then` clause of the `if` statement,
we shadow `ix` with a copy of itself that has a refined type. We do not
have to shadow the original. We could pick a new name for the binder with
the refined type. We need for type-level natural numbers to exist at runtime
so that we are able to compare value-level numbers against them.

What else do we need? Sometimes, we need to start out with a number
and then promote it to the type level. Like this:

    replicate : {n} -> a -> Array n a
    foo : (Int | >= 0) -> Int -> Int
    foo(count, val):
      {n} = toNat(count)
      sum{n}(replicate{n}(val))

We can only use `toNat` to promote nonnegative integers. We only want
to have natural numbers at the type level. Why? There are some useful
properties that natural numbers have. For example:

    (Int | <= a) <: (Int | <= a + b)

This is true for all natural numbers `a` and `b`, but it is not true
for all integers `a` and `b`.

Let's consider a hypothetical `midpoint` function. It might look
like this:

    midpoint : (Int | >=0, <=a) -> (Int | >=0, <=b) -> (Int | >=0, <=(a/2) + (b/2))

This shows up when performing divide-and-conquer algorithms on arrays
(typically sorted arrays). Dividing by two is tricky. We probably want
to use the theory of rational numbers instead of the theory of integers
here. That way, we can know that `a/2 + a/2 = a`, which is nice. There
are things that we lose with the theory of rationals, but it's all stuff
that we cannot really exploit in this system anyway.

Strict inequality is frustrating here. With arrays, we want to require
the indices to be like this:

    index : {n} -> Array n a -> (Int | >=0, <n) -> a

We could rewrite `<n` as `<=n-1`, but we only want nonnegative integers
to exist, so we cannot have negative one as a term anywhere. Maybe this
would work:

    index : {n} -> Array n a -> (Int | ? >= 0, ? < n) -> a
    ==>
    index : {n} -> Array n a -> (Int | ? >= 0, ? + 1 <= n) -> a

This is probably the right way to do it. Although we need refined integers
to always be nonnegative. That's probably fine because the whole point of
this is to help with array indices. This means though, that it will be
difficult to subtract a refined integral term from another one. Difficult,
but not impossible. For example:

    x     : (Int | ? >=5)
    x - 2 : (Int | ? >=3)
    y     : (Int | ? <=4)
    x - y : (Int | ? >=1)

So, this works out fine. I am not sure how often it is important to be able
to actually do this though.

I think that it should be possible to default upper bounds to 2^31-1 or to
2^63-1 depending on the bit width of the integer. And the lower bound is
defaulted to zero in either case.

# Regions and RCs and Mimalloc

I've been thinking more about how to avoid using two 64-bit pointers to
represent every object. The difficult part about this is that I cannot
embed any information in the pointer itself. Doing that requires asking
mimalloc to do something that it is not designed to do. Maybe it would be
enough to just get this right when passing function arguments. I think
that should be fine. An object refined with a region should only be a
single pointer (because the pointer to the counter is a separate argument),
and then, in a prologue, we could assemble the structs that pair each
pointer with its region.

In fact, the same thing would work for arrays. The only way to get away
with this is by rejecting higher-order functions.

# Forking Threads

I still have not figured out how I want to deal with threading. I can probably
figure this out later though.
