# Wither Region Handles?

In the implementation of regions that I am thinking of, region handles
(effectively an allocation capability) are annoying to deal with. They
also have no runtime representation. Consider something like this:

    doubleton : (r : Region) -> a -> Array(a)@r

Handles would bloat this function's type signature. Every invocation would
be accompanied by an additional argument.

However, there is one scenario where we might still want to restrict
allocation. Existentially quantified single-object regions benefit from
an allocation restriction for two reasons:

1. Constraining behavior. If a function takes an argument whose region
   is existentially packed, we expect that the function does not allocate
   more object into the region. It would be nice to upgrade this from
   a mere expectation to a guarantee.
2. Implementation. It's possible to design single-object regions so that
   they can be grown, but there is overhead. The "handle" machinery needs
   to track, at the least, a "next" address and an "end" address.

# Restricting Allocation With Subkinding

Suppose that we distinguish between read-only regions and read-write regions.
Here, the word "write" refers to allocation, not mutation. Now `doubleton`
might be written as:

    doubleton : (r : RW) -> a -> Array(a)@r
    index     : (r : RO) -> Array(a)@r -> S32 -> a

A single-object region would be an `RO` packed with the object, and there is
no way to recover an `RW` from an `RO`. I explored an idea like this in the
entries from 2024-07-31 and 2024-08-02. The biggest different between my
thinking then and now is capture in the entry from 2025-01-14. I want to
handle mutation with a system that is entirely separate from regions.
