# Merging Message-Oriented Streams over Linux Pipes   

I've been reading about `splice`, `vmsplice`, and `tee` lately. I'm
trying to make sure I fully understand what Linux pipes have to offer.
The question I've been pondering is: Can we perform a zero-copy merge
of two or more message-oriented streams?

First of all, what is a message-oriented stream? I made this term up.
It means implementing a message-oriented protocol on top of an
abstraction that only provides stream semantics. In a very general
setting, it's trivial to do this. Every message is simply prefixed
with its length (typically 32-bit big-endian encoded). In practice,
it's useful to throw a magic byte sequence in there as well just
to aid the detection of an implementation error. This looks like:

    +----------------+----------------+-----------------------+
    |   0xAB43C146   |     75602      |  ...................  |
    +----------------+----------------+-----------------------+
     magic (4 bytes)   size (4 bytes)   payload (75602 bytes)

Above, I wrote the magic byte sequence in hexadecimal and the size
in decimal strictly for convenince. This human-readable representations
have nothing to do with the way they are actually represented in this
hypothetical protocol. Crucially, they must both with encoded in
some fixed-width way (usually 32-bit big-endian), but the specifics
are not important here. This pattern shows up all over the place
in protocols that are implemented on top of TCP. Such protocols
need the reliability that TCP provides but aren't really
stream-oriented protocols. Although maybe everything boils down
to messages. Anyway, let's get back to the scheduled program.

Although the implementation of such a messages-over-streams protocol
is well-understood, I couldn't find any resources online about how to
the interaction between Linux's zero-copy pipe functions and the
implementation of a message-oriented protocol. First, here is some
background on using `splice` and `tee` to manipulate streams.
Implementing `tee` is easy: David Martínez Oliveira does it in
[How to Use Tee and Splice](http://papermint-designs.com/dmo-blog/2017-03-how-to-use-tee-and-splice).
It's worth mentioning that his implementation only duplicates at most
1KB at a time. Since this is less than a 4KB page, I doubt it
actually leads to any sharing of pipe buffers. Martínez observes,
"I made some performance tests comparing the system tee command
and my implementation, and I couldn't find any real performance
difference between them." I suspect that this 1KB argument is the reason why.
In [fastcat](https://endler.dev/2018/fastcat/), Matthias Endler is
reimplements `cat` with `splice` and to observes nearly a 3x
performance improvement. Endler splices 16KB at a time instead of
1KB. Keep in mind that Martínez and Endler are reimplementing
different tools, and the difference in performance should certainly
be attributed in part to fact that `tee` simply must do more work
that `cat`.

With that background reading out of the way, let's get back to the
original question: Can we perform a zero-copy merge of two or more
message-oriented streams? This is not quite the opposite of `tee`,
but it's in the same realm. Here is the trick I devised. Let's
consider the task of merging only two message-oriented pipes. We may
assume that the head of each pipe is the the header (the magic
byte and the size). We will need to ensure that we preserve this
invariant for each pipe after reading from them. Before the main
loop that runs forever, we perform some setup:

* Create an unnamed pipe (via `pipe`). Let's call this `spy`.
  It will be used to look at message sizes.
* Open up both named pipe that we want to merge. Let's call
  these `alpha` and `beta`.
* We will merge the streams into `stdout`.

Now we perform the main loop:

1. `tee` 8 bytes (the size of the header) from `alpha` to `spy`.
   If there is no data available, go to step 4.
2. Read 8 bytes (a header) from `spy`. Get the size from the
   header. Call this `alphaSz`. Effectively, we have used `spy`
   to peek at the head of the pipe.
3. Use `splice` to pull `alphaSz + 8` bytes from `alpha` to
   `stdout`. This needs to happen in a loop.
4. `tee` 8 bytes from `beta` to `spy`. If there is no data available,
    go to step 1.
5. Read 8 bytes (a header) from `spy`. Get the size from the
   header. Call this `betaSz`.
6. Use `splice` to pull `betaSz + 8` bytes from `beta` to
   `stdout`. This needs to happen in a loop.
7. Go back to step 1.

That's it, roughly. In reality, steps 1 and 4 need to happen using
epoll. Otherwise, this would just spin loop while it waited for
data to show up. This scheme only works if all of the clients are
not malicious. A client could produce its message slowly to DoS
the other clients. Even a non-malicious client could do this
accidentally. I'm not sure if there is a good way to detect and
terminate such a client. I cannot think of a one.

Another thing to keep in mind is that you only get the zero-copy
behavior when your messages are sufficiently large. I would guess
that you want them to be at least 12KB, but that's just a guess.
If they are all under 4KB, I doubt this clever merge strategy
would do any better than plain-old `read` and `write`.
