# Accelerating a Bitpacked Permute

I have a permute function that looks like this:

    uint64_t permute_u64_using_block_naive(uint64_t arr, const uint8_t* ixs, uint32_t log_ix_bit_size);

The behavior of this function is that it permutes the argument `arr`,
which is treated as a vector of `max(64, 2^(2^log_ix_bit_size))` bits.
And the `ixs` vector has exactly 64 indices, each one encoded using
`2^log_ix_bit_size` bits. So it might have 64, 128, 256, or 512 bits
total, which means that it is always 64-bit aligned.

## Tangential Thought About Representation

One of the strengths of this approach is that the indices are always
trivially aligned within a 64-bit word. One of the weaknesses is that
we have to jump straight from 4-bit indices to 8-bit indices, and
8-bit indices are particularly wasteful since we only use 25% of their
range.

Another option I've consider is splitting the bits for an integer across
multiple 64-bit words. So, a block of 64 4-bit integers would have all
the high bits together in a single 64-bit word. This strategy trivially
supports non-power-of-two sizes (3-bit, 5-bit, etc.) without any
alignment concerns. The question is whether or not there is a good way
to access integers stored this way.

To read a single integer, we need to read all of the 64-bit words,
projecting a single bit from each of them. I think the easiest way to
consume integers compressed in this way would be to unpack them into
integers with the correct width. For indices, we have a convenient upper
bound on the size, 8 bits. And we know that we are unpacking exactly
64 elements. So the result would be 64 bytes, one cache line. But how
do we populate it? Naively, we could start at the highest bit and shift
the result words to the left by one each time. The number of operations
would be 64 times the per-word bit count. The maximum per-word bit count,
in this case, is 6, so that would be 384 operations (where each operation
includes at least a load, a shift, and a store) to reconstruct the
64 8-bit words.

But we can do much better than this even without vector instructions.
We can load 8 bits at a time and deposit them into a 64-bit word all
at the sime time. This reduces the operation count by a factor of 8.
It seems like there is still room for improvement. We're processing
8 bits at a time instead of 1 bit at a time, but it would be much
better to process 64 bits at a time.

Let's think about how we might do this with vector instructions.
We need to either spead bits across a larger result register, or we
need to load more bits. The first option is better because we cannot
generally assume that we even have more than 64 bits available.
With AVX2, we can load and spread 8 bits across the low bit of
each 32-bit lane (broadcast + srlv). Then we have to save those
8 bits somewhere. This is no better than the BMI-based strategy.
We need this to process 32 bits at a time instead of 8. We can
do a broadcast with `_mm256_set1_epi32`. Then we can do staggered
32-bit right shifts so that the low bit of each 8-bit lane is
occupied by a different bit from the source. We need to merge this
into the destination. This is actually easy. If we fill in bits
from the bottom (left shifting the accumulator), nothing will
cross lanes anyway. We don't need an 8-bit shift. We could use
the 32-bit shift or even the 16-bit shift or the 64-bit shift.

So with AVX2, we can process 32 bits at a time. Even in the worst
case (6 bits per index), that's 12 operations to get the job done,
which is not bad.

Is there a way to consume the indices without transforming them first?
Consider the permute function that I am attempting to write. Is there
any meaningful operation that can be performed using just the high bits
of each index? Kind of. You need 64 copies of the bit array that you are
permuting, and you would need to shift each of them by 2^ix or zero at
each step. So, in the worst case, with 6-bit indices, you'd have 64
copies of a 64-bit (8-byte) integer, which is 512 bytes. With AVX2,
you could load 4 of these at once and update them simultaneously.
So you could reduce your 384 operations by a factor of 4. But you
would have to keep spilling intermediate results to cache over and
over, so I'm not sure this makes sense. With 5-bit indices, 64 copies
of the bit array would only require 256 bytes, and you could use 8
lanes at a time instead of 4. Still, this is not great.

Instead of working with 64 intermediate results, we could just compute
8 at a time (for 5-bit indices at least). Suppose that we have 8 32-bit
lanes in a YMM register. We load the lowest byte from the 64-bit word
at ixs[4], giving us the highest bits of all of the lowest indexes.
We shift the intermediate result, then load the lowest byte from ixs[3].
And so on. After 5 loads, we have 8 entire indices applied. We stash
that 8-bit fragment somewhere and then do this 8 more times. That gives
us 40 operations, each involving at least an 8-bit load and a vectorized
shift.

This is not very good. It is flawed in a fundamental way: we've taken
what should be a single-operation shift and turned it into a series
of many shifts instead.

Relatedly, something else nice about this representation is that it
makes it easier to recognize the "all ones" pattern that indicates that
the patch set should be consulted. You can just reduce all of the 64-bit
words with bitwise "and", and then you have the patch mask.

# Vectorization Difficulties in Packlab

I'm realizing that the bitpacking strategy used in packlab is not as
amenable to vector instructions as I hoped that it would be. The difficulty
is that the elements have unknown sizes, but the x86 vector instructions
expect that the sizes of everything are known. It's possible to pad everything
out to 64 bits, but at that point, we've only got 4 lanes available on AVX2.
After the cost of massaging the data is factored in, it ends up being
a wash.

The noncontiguous representation has several advantages:

* The compression ratios are superior. For example, we don't have to round
  5 bits up to 8 bits because 64-bit alignment is trivial.
* Even without using any vector instructions, we can get huge speedups on
  equality tests when the integer domain is small. For example, to check
  64 4-bit integers for equality against the same target integer, we can
  broadcast each bit in the target and then XOR with the source bits to
  check that it matched that particular location. The number of XOR operations
  that we perform scales linearly with the number of bits needed to represent
  the integers. You could even short circuit if you find that that are
  no matches. Testing for short circuiting could be expensive though.
* Bumping the block size from 64 to 128 or 256 improves opportunities
  to use vector instructions. For equality checks, for example, XOR and
  AND are both available at vector bit widths. (Although there are other
  reasons that it might still not be a good idea to do this. The impact
  on the API is considerable.)
* For similar reasons, we could get nice speedups when checking to see
  if an IPv4 address belongs in a subnet. It is not necessary to process
  the low bits of the address. We can just test the high bits for equality,
  and they are all conveniently colocated.
* I'm not sure about greater-than and less-than. If you work your way
  down from the high bits to the low bits, you can be in three states:
  gt, lt, eq. So you need two bits, possibly three. Once gt or lt is
  set, you should stay stuck in that state. There's some way to do this,
  but I need to think through it more.
* Representing 16-byte and 32-byte words is trivial with this strategy.

# Noncontiguous Representation Continued

So, we could use this representation for bitpacked data and for offsets.
But what about dictionary elements and patch elements? These do not have
the same 64-element (or 256-element) guarantee, some of the strengths
disappear. In particular, we do not know that the data is aligned in
any particular way. We could pad it out to get it aligned on 8-bit
boundaries, but in the worst case, that could increase the size of
data by a factor of 8. We could switch to 8-bit chunking instead of 1-bit
chunking, and then it would naturally end up 8-bit aligned. That's
not great because it requires a different code path for this data.

I think I've got an idea. What if we have no padding, but when the
dictionary elements or patch elements are accessed, they are first
copied onto the stack, where they are correctly aligned. Also, the
padding elements should be either all zeros or all ones.

This "pad before use" strategy requires, in the worst case, 64 loads
and 64 stores. That would happen if a 64-bit integer needed to be
encoded.

An LLM has suggested a pad-on-demand strategy, where a length less than
64 (assuming a block size of 64) is carried around with the data. This
requires redesigning any predicates that use the data. Those predicates
would need to compute offsets dynamically (instead of just incrementing
by 8 bytes each time) and would probably need to shift and mask after
loading each element. This strategy is fine, but I'm realizing that
I am not happy with the performance characteristics. Suppose that we
have 1 patch element, and that patch element requires 64 bits. We would
end up performing up to 64 operations to test equality on that one
element. The only reason that the bit-by-bit approach was even acceptable
to begin with was that we could evaluate a bunch of elements at the same
time.

I think using bytes (instead of bits) for this case is probably the best
option. Each element should require the same number of bytes. We need
a different code path for evaluating predicates on these, but it's ok
if it's not as fast because there are fewer evaluations.

# Closures in GCC

Look at https://uecker.codeberg.page/2026-01-06.html for a good example
of implementing closures in C. The author's macros and builtins perform
an effective translation from this:

    int baz(wide(int, int) p, int x)
    {
      return CALL(p, (x));
    }
  
    int foo(int k)
    {
      int bar(int x) { return k + x; }
      return baz(CLOSURE(int, int, bar), 2 * k);
    }

To this (fixing a typo from the original post):

    #define wide(R, A) struct wideptr_##R##_##A { void *chain; R (*code)(void *, A); }
    static int baz(wide(int, int) p, int x)
    {
      return p.code(p.chain, x);
    }
    struct frame_foo { int k; };
    static int bar(void *_chain, int x) 
    {
      struct frame_foo *chain = _chain;
      return chain->k + x;
    }
    int foo(int _k)
    {
      struct frame_foo frame = { _k; };
      return baz((wide(int, int){ &frame, bar }, 2 * frame.k);
    }

There is a godbolt example for this second form at https://godbolt.org/z/95hEjxeP7

This illustrates nicely how to do this in C.
