# High-Level Constructs I Wish Existed

I was working in C recently and prompted Claude to fill out some functions.
It's C, so some of these functions can be extra tedious, but I realized
that even in any of the higher-level languages that I use, these things
would be tedious.

## Apply Regex to a Stream

The C standard library has `fscanf`, which is sort of like this, but it
has to be invoked manually in a loop, and it's less powerful than regex.
I was trying to pull blocks. of 256 decimal-encoded u64 integers from an
input file. I feel like it ought to be possible to write something like
this (in a made up language):

    numbers : Array<256>(U64) = file.read(my_fd, r/([[:digit:]]+\n){256}/)

There are several problems. Two that stand out are:

* The POSIX character class `digit` is just a predicate for characters. It
  does not have any information about resolving what is read to an integer.
  In fact, this regex even matches integers that are outside of the 64-bit
  unsigned range.
* Whatever makes the repetition construct copy a capture group into an array
  seems complicated. 

## Grammar Tools

Every programming language ends up with various tools for generating a parser
from a grammar. I just wish these weren't so terrible to use. I can struggle
through it when I absolutely have to, but for "little languages", the hurdle
of getting one of these working stops me from doing it. I want something that's
more tightly integrated with the compiler.

Relatedly, I've never found lexers (i.e. tokenizers) helpful. I think this
might be because:

1. Lexing usually (always?) has bounded lookahead. This means that recursive
   descent works well.
2. I've used Haskell a lot, and Haskell is particularly good at expressing
   parsers directly in the language. This is more difficult in C.
