# Performance Comparing All Array Elements Against Target for Equality

I've been thinking about whether or not a dictionary is likely to speed up
an equality predicate. But I need a baseline. In array-predicate-shootout,
I've does some checks for this:

    Benchmark                                    Time
    bench_cmpeq_64k_u32_avx_best/repeats:1    2499 ns
    bench_cmpeq_64k_u64_avx_best/repeats:1    5413 ns

These both use what is, to my knowledge, the best possible AVX strategy for
comparing all elements against a single target element. Lets focus on the
array of 32-bit elements. At 4 bytes each, 64K elements consume 256KB memory.
The computer I'm running this on has 832KB L1 cache, so the whole array stays
in L1 for the entire benchmark.

This benchmark suggests that, assuming no other bottlenecks, my laptop would
process about 26 billion 32-bit elements per second.

## Comparing Against Clickhouse

As a contrasting data point, I have a clickhouse table with about 200M rows.
One of the columns in this table is the destination ip. Here is a `count` query
that should only target this one column:

    select count(destination_ip) from pan_traffic where destination_ip = '192.0.2.100';

On a 3-instance (8 vCPU, 32GB memory each) cluster at Clickhouse Cloud, this query
churns through 382M 32-bit elements in 420ms. The actual times reported by
Clickhouse vary considerably. I've chosen the lowest number that I saw reported.
Once the page cache is warmed, and there are no inserts, this number is pretty
stable. This suggests a rate of 909 million elements per second.

So why is Clickhouse 28x slower for this query? I'm not sure. Uncompressed, the
382M ip addresses need about 1.53GB memory, so there should not be any disk access.
Also, Clickhouse is presumably multithreaded and it's distributed. The 3-node
cluster has access to 24 cores, and the programming running on my laptop has
access to 1 core. I don't have an answer to this. I'm just surprised that the
gap is this big.

One other thing I've noticed is that Clickhouse compresses the 1.53GB down to
1.05GB with ZSTD. That brings the size down to 68% of the original size.
This compression ratio is not impressive for this data. There are other
algorithms that I've described in other entries that both (a) make the data
even smaller and (b) make it possible to perform common queries without
decompressing the data.

## Comparing Against Pyarrow

Pyarrow is comparable to clickhouse. On my laptop, pyarrow (v24) is able to
process 1.4 billion 32-bit elements per second when checking for equality.
The record batches in the arrow file have 1M elements each. Here's the
script that I used:

    import pyarrow.feather as pf
    import pyarrow.compute as pc
    import time
    table = pf.read_table('traffic.arrow', columns=['destination_ip'])
    num_rows = table.num_rows
    nbytes = table.nbytes
    print(f'Column {num_rows} elements and uses {nbytes} bytes')
    warmed_count = table.filter(pc.field('destination_ip') > 2000000000).num_rows
    print(f'Warming up table with expr that matched {warmed_count} elements')
    start = time.perf_counter()
    total = 0
    iteration_count = 50
    for i in range(iteration_count):
      ct = table.filter(pc.field('destination_ip') > i).num_rows
      total = total + ct
    end = time.perf_counter()
    duration = end - start
    print(f'Total matches (not important): {total}.')
    total_elements_processed = iteration_count * num_rows
    print(f'Spent {duration} running {iteration_count} iterations, processing {total_elements_processed} elements total.')
    elements_per_second = total_elements_processed / duration
    print(f'Processed {elements_per_second} elements per second')

I'm not sure why this is so slow. In array-predicate-shootout, the naive
algorithm processes around 2B elements per second. It's possible that
pyarrow doesn't actually use SIMD to test for equality.
