# Recap

Here are the good ideas that came out of the entry on 2026-05-07:

* If we wrap all functions with out-parameter variations, we can support
  polymorphic arguments and results. Polymorphic values are implicitly
  pointers. This increases the overhead of indirect function calls,
  but direct calls can still invoke the non-wrapped functions.
* Every type should describe whether it is boxed or struct-like, and
  it always has to be used the same way.

Function wrappers are related to a few other issues. These are explored
in the rest of this entry.

# Interaction with Closures

A closure is represented by a two-word value. One word is a function pointer,
and the other word is an environment. One of the function's arguments is a
pointer to the environment. Since the environment is consolidated, it makes
sense to ask whether or not the arguments could be consolidated in the same
way. Let's try this out. Consider a function like this:

    foo : (I64, I64, I64) -> I64

One way to make the wrapper is:

    void foo(int64_t* out, const int64_t*, const int64_t*, const int64_t*);

But what if we consolidated the arguments:

    struct foo_args { int64_t a, b, c };
    void foo(int64_t* out, const struct_foo_args*);

Does this work? It works in this particular case because there is no type
abstraction. Every argument to `foo` (or to any function with its same
type signature) has a known position in the struct of arguments. The
positions are 0, 8, 16. However, this would not work if the types were
not known. It's only possible to know the positions of monotypes and at
most one polytype.

One solution is to restrict the number of type variables that a function
can have (just like how I'm planning on preventing type constructors from
taking multiple ground-type arguments). This would make it impossible to
write `zipWith` or any `fold` functions. That's a bad outcome.

Let's go back to one pointer per argument. If we `foo` to be usable in
all the same contexts that closures are used, it needs a dummy argument.
Also, we have to use `void*` instead of `int64_t*` to make its type
line up with that of polymorphic functions:

    void foo(void* out, const void* env, const void*, const void*, const void*);
    struct closure_arity_3 {
      const void* env;
      void (*fn)(void*, const void*, const void*, const void*, const void*);
    };
    void run3(void* out, struct closure_arity_3 closure, const void* a, const void* b, const void* c) {
      closure.fn(out, closure.env, a, b, c);
    }

We could unify all closures by passing the three arguments as an array of
pointers. We would then have:

    void foo(void* out, const void* env, const void** args);

And the arity is tracked by the type system. This is not bad. Calling these
functions requires helper functions to be ergonomic:

    int64_t apply_int_int_int_ret_int(struct closure, int64_t a, int64_t b, int64_t c) {
      void* args[3] = {&a, &b, &c};
      int64_t out;
      closure.fn(&out, closure.env, args);
      return out;
    }

This works. It makes it possible to apply closures using a C expression rather
than a statement. However, it's a pain to generate these wrappers. There are
an infinite number of them, so they must be generated beside each function.
This is possible. It's just an annoying codegen wrinkle. These functions can
all be marked `static inline` to (likely) prevent them from actually showing
up in object files.

It's worth keeping in mind that defining a closure already results in something
outside of the contextual function being created. 

# Closure Environments

Closure environments require more thought. What happens when a closure closes over
values with abstract types? They cannot just be laid out contiguously because
it's impossible to compute their positions cheaply. (This is the same issue
from earlier.) Anything with an abstract type requires a indirection
(i.e. a pointer). For closures to be first class, they cannot point to the
stack. They must copy values from the stack. I now see how this must work.
This is what is required:

    struct closure_arity_3 {
      const void* env;
      void (*fn)(void*, const void*, const void**); // Args: out param, env, args array
    };
    struct example_env {
      int64_t alpha;
      void* beta;  // Points into variable_sized_members
      void* gamma; // Points into variable_sized_members
      char variable_sized_members[];
    }

If the environment has a buffer for all of its variable-sized (polymorphic)
fields, we can push all of the offset computation to construction time. When
we actually access the polymorphic fields, it will be cheap to look them up.

This is not very compact. Every polymorphic value in the context requires
an extra pointer to represent. When a closure is guaranteed to be outlived
by the polymorphic value that it closes over (which is somewhat common),
it should not even be necessary to copy it into `variable_sized_members`.
The pointer could just refer directly to the existing value (on the stack
or the heap).

Closures can be allocated on the stack or on the heap. Any closure allocated
on the stack is guaranteed to have a lifetime that is shorter than everything
it closes over. Closures allocated on the heap do not have this same guarantee.
Here's a reasonable starting place: A stack-allocated closure has no
limitations, and a heap-allocated closure has some limitations around
a polymorphic context. This cannot be enforced with a type system. It's
possible to remove the restrictions around heap-allocated closures later
by copying polymorphic values into a special `variable_sized_members` member.

# Stack Frames

How should stack allocation work in a region type system? This seems like it
should be a very simple question. Stack frames are just little regions, right?
Not exactly. They have a few additional properties:

* Users expect for stack frames to have a fixed size. The C function `alloca`
  is an exception to this rule, but it's use is discouraged. A more simple
  alternative is to just allocate the maximum number of bytes that might be
  required. Overallocating like that in a heap-backed region would be
  unacceptable, but on the stack, it's ok.
* Modeling the stack with regions leads to a strange interaction with
  recursive join points (but not with nonrecursive join points!). We
  should not allocate without bound into a single stack frame. Doing
  this would require `alloca`, and it kind of defeats the purpose of
  recursive join points, which is to not blow the stack. 
* Stack frames cannot intersect with each other in the same way the regions
  can. In particular, allocation is an issue. Suppose that we are in an
  effectful context in which we can allocate into stack frame A. Then,
  we open up a new stack frame B (probably because we have called a function).
  The system must yield the capability to allocate into A while B is live.
  At runtime, these two are laid out contiguously, so the compiler must
  known where A ends and where B begins. Even more pragmatically, any
  stack-based allocation capability must be yielded when calling any
  function.

These properties suggest that a stack frame is not "just a special kind
of region". The one thing that does need to be possible though is treating
a stack frame as a read-only region when calling a function. This suggests
that stacks and regions should share a kind. Maybe the difference should be
the allocation capability:

    withRegion : {a : Type}({r : Region}[Alloc(r)]() -> a) -> a
    withStack  : {a : Type}({r : Region}[AllocStack(r)]() -> a) -> a

All `AllocStack` capabilities are removed by recursive join points and
function calls. The way a user sees this is that a function's type signature
cannot ever have `AllocStack` in it (except for a builtin inlined HOF
like `withStack`). This also suggests that capability polymorphism
should not be allowed. That's fine. I was not planning on having that
anyway, but it is not compatible with this system.

Weirdly, we end up needing two variants of the allocate function:

    // Requires Alloc(r)
    alloc.rgn{r}(Cons, head: foo, tail: others)
    // Requires AllocStack(r)
    alloc.stk{s}(Cons, head: bar, tail: others)

In a monomorphic setting, these have the same behavior. But in a polymorphic
setting, they differ. The stack variant overallocates, using the largest
supported size for the head element. It must do this so that the stack
frame has a predictable size.

There are a number of functions that it might be reasonable to offer as
primitives. Consider:

    encode.u64.stk : {s : Region}[AllocStack(s)](U64) -> Array(U64)@s

The resulting array cannot have more than 23 elements. It's reasonable
to let someone put this on the stack. But the way this function works
is different from the way that its region-based variant work. The
region-based variant allocates. The stack-based variant accepts an
"out" argument that the result is written to. Under the hood, both
variants can (and should) call a common buffer-filling function. 

This is a little unsatisfying. We need to have both `encode.u64` and
`encode.u64.stk` as separate primitives. I can see how a user might expect
that `encode.u64` is somehow overloaded to work for both cases. However,
such an overloading would be fraught. Type inference would be difficult,
and the presentation would obscure important information. 

# How Visible Are Pointers to Users?

I think that the system discussed earlier in this entry abolishes user-facing
pointers. I'd like to confirm this. Consider the `index` function, which may
be lowered to any of these:

    // Array of I64
    int64_t      x = ((int64_t*)(my_array.payload))[i];
    // Array of Expr
    struct expr* x = ((struct expr**)(my_array.payload))[i];
    // Array of Vec3
    struct vec3* x = (struct vec3*)(my_array.payload) + i;
    // Array of abstract type "a" (I don't like the multiply here)
    void*        x = (void*)(my_array.payload + (i * a.size));

The first two examples actually perform a load from memory. The last two
examples merely compute a pointer. The advantage of just computing a pointer
is that a predicatable amount of work is performed. This disadvantage is
that the type system does not connect the lifetime of this pointer to the
lifetime of the array. I don't think this is a serious issue though. For
an unboxed type like `vec3`, the only situation where we end up with a
pointer is when we have a reference from the stack. So, when a `withRegion`
block ends, if the value we are returning is of type `vec3`, the value
is represented as a pointer, so we must perform a shallow copy. We never
have to perform a deep copy.

So it seems like this all works out fine.

# Better Copy Performance for Values with Abstract Types

If we always bump up when allocating, then we end up with extra memory
available at the end of a region. This is nice because it should be safe to
write garbage to that region. In theory a `memcpy` from a `char[32]` to
a `char[32]` should be lowered to use a `VMOVDQA` with a YMM register
on x86. The cost of this optimization is that there is a hard cap on
the size of struct types.

Other architectures have not made the same commitment to wide registers
that x86 has. ARM has 128-bit loads and stores available through NEON.
The SVE ARM extension is much more like RISC-V vector extension. It
keeps the vector register size hidden from the user so that the same
code works on all CPUs. But this means that there is not a widely available
"large" register.

There's always the option of just using a `for` loop and copying 64 bits
(or maybe 128 bits) at a time. It's even possible to just unconditionally
perform the copy for the first chunk. In C, this is expressed idiomatically
as a do-while statement. Even on x86 (with FSRM), this might still be the
best choice. Maybe. I can't find any hard numbers on FSRM, but it seems
really good from what I can find.

There's another option, which is to require that all struct types are
16 bytes or less. Then we have a super fast branchless option for x86
and ARM (and even WASM). RISC-V would have to perform back-to-back
64-bit operations. The biggest drawback is that 16 bytes is a pretty
small limit. For example, all of the examples involving `Vec3` would
be unable to inline the vector into an array (assuming 64-bit integers).
However, that's not really a big deal for `Vec3` because it's possible
to just have an array of i64 that's three times longer.

Here's something else that's nice about capping the size: We can use
a bitshift instead of multiplication when computing array indices.
The only supported sizes are 1, 2, 4, 8, and 16. These are all multiples
of two, so we can represent them as their logarithms instead. The zero
size cannot be correctly represented, so we need some kind of trick.
Maybe it's better to just use the size. It's actually better in most
situations.

Let's go back to the "no large structs" thing. This seems like it
works out fine. I can't think of many situations where I am really
counting on being able to store a 24-byte value in a container.
The overhead of the pointer is usually fine by the time something
gets that large.

Another thing that's nice about "no large structs" is that it helps
us with closures. On x86, we can return 128-bit values directly
in registers (`xmm`). We still need the wrapper, but it's a slightly
better wrapper. We could use the `xmm` registers (via `__m128`) directly
for the arguments, or we could build a stack-allocated array from
the padded values. Unfortunately, the wrapper is still not able to
tail call the wrapped function because the return conventions do not
generally agree with one another. Even 128-bit types like array
are supposed to get returned in two GPRs, not a single XMM register,
so those aren't compatible either.

Here's a way to represent this somewhat idiomatically in C:

    // Note: Size is 16 bytes. Alignment should be forced to
    // 16 bytes with some directive.
    struct abstract {
      union {
        uint8_t u8; 
        uint16_t u16;
        uint32_t u32;
        uint64_t u64;
        void* ptr;
        struct array array;
        char opaque[16];
      }
    }

And now we can call an unknown 3-argument function like this:

    call(fn, (struct abstract[]){{.u64 = foo}, {.u32 = bar}, {.ptr = baz}})

Suppose we have a user-defined type like `Vec2`. How should this be handled?
There could be a conversion function for each type:

    struct abstract {
      char data[16];
    }
    static inline vec2_to_abstract(struct vec2 v) {
      struct abstract r;
      memcpy(r, v, sizeof(struct vec2));
      return r;
    }

This relies on `static inline` functions and C compiler optimizations, but
it's able to correctly support user-defined types.

I've got a hybrid approach that I think should be fine. Let's use the
original definition of `abstract` and then add:

    // Note: size is 16 or less
    static inline struct abstract to_abstract(const void* v, size_t sz) {
      struct abstract r;
      memcpy(r.opaque, v, sz);
      return r;
    }

Now we can use this for all user-defined types:

    call(fn, (struct abstract[]){{.u64 = foo}, to_abstract(&myVec, 16), {.ptr = baz}})

We still get to use the nice (and slightly more strongly typed) union syntax
for common types, and we have a single function that handles everything else
for us.

Return values raise a question: What is the calling convention when returning
a value of type `struct abstract`? If more values are added to the union
(esp. float and double), does that convention change?

# Late Calling-Convention Specialization of Functions

I want to consider a different approach. This might not work at all, but
I think that it's worth a try. Suppose that, at the call site of an unknown
function, we call the unknown function with a calling convention matching
all the types that we currently know. That is, instead of using a maximally
generalized variant of every function, we called it as though it were just
as general as it needed to be in the calling context. So if we call a function
of type `(U64, U64) -> U64`, it would result in calling a C function pointer
that takes two `uint64_t` arguments and returns a `uint64_t`.

Now we avoid doing any additional work at the call site. But we must do this
work somewhere. Suppose we have a function like this:

    first : a -> a -> a
    first @U64 : U64 -> U64 -> U64

This returns the first argument and discards the second argument. What should
it be lowered to? Maybe something like this:

    // Note, the size_t argument is not used in the implementation
    // of first, but more generally, it is sometimes needed.
    __m128 first(size_t, __m128, __m128);
    uint64_t first_u64(uint64_t a, uint64_t b) {
      return _mm_extract_epi64(8, _mm_set_epi64x(0, a), _mm_set_epi64x(0, b), 0);
    }

It's easy to create a wrapper like this at the top level. So as long as
we pin down the signature with monotypes, the wrappers can be constructed
at the top level. There are two possibilities for unknowns:

1. A type variable being passed to the function is not known at compile time.
2. The function itself is not known, but the type variable is known.

Sitution 1 is easy. We don't have to do anything to support this other that
pass the type as a size. Situation 2 is difficult. GCC supports nested functions
as an extension, but I don't think it's a good idea to rely on this feature.
Also, where should the wrapper with the specialized type live? It could be
placed on the stack or the heap, but requiring an allocation effect would be
a surprising deviation from System F.

Maybe there are other options. How many specialized C functions do we really
need? The calling conventions for all integral types are the same (modulo
sign extension or high bits set to zero). So we need these:

    int64_t  first_i64(int64_t  a, int64_t  b);
    uint64_t first_u64(uint64_t a, uint64_t b);
    void*    first_ptr(void*    a, void*    b);

This handles all boxed types with the `void*` specialization. It also handles
all integral types, signed via `int64_t` and unsigned via `uint64_t`. It
might be possible to unify the cases for integers, but I would have to think
through how sign extension would work. We are still missing support for arrays,
floating-point types, and all user-defined struct-like types. Any user-defined
types need to use a `struct opaque` type. So we end up needing these as well:

    float         first_f32(float  a       , float  b);
    double        first_f64(double a       , double b);
    struct opaque first_any(struct opaque a, struct opaque b); 

This does not seem like it is going to work. We have to be able to specialize
an unknown polymorphic function, but we also have to be able to go backwards.
For example, if we have a function of type `I64 -> I64`, we might end up
feeding it into a `map` function (`(a -> b) -> [a] -> [b]`), where the caller
applies it to values whose types are not known.

I hade hoped that it would be possible to tie all of the wrappers for a
function together with a knot. But it seems like there are just too many
of them. Even the simple case of something like `I64 -> I64` can turn
into `A -> A` or `A -> B` (which cannot be respecialized).

Maybe we do not need anything cyclic. If rank-2-types are forbidden,
then we will never have an unknown function with type `forall a. a -> a`.
Which means that we only ever need to specialize a polymorphic function
when it's a known function (so we can build a wrapper at the top level).

There are a lot of possible upcasts. For example, we might need to turn
`I64 -> I64` into `A -> I64` or `I64 -> A` or `A -> B` or `A -> A`.
Every time we add another argument to a function, the possibilities grow
larger. I think this only happens during function application, like when
we apply `map` to its function argument. The function with the new type
signature cannot escape, so it might be possible to build it on the stack.
There's is not going to work correctly with an identity function on
a function argument: `id_fn : forall a b. (a -> b) -> (a -> b)`. When
this is applied (e.g. `id_fn{Int,Int}(increment)`), the result that we
get back would not have the expected monomorphic type.
Also, if this works out, we need to use `void*` instead of `struct opaque`
for the arguments.

Maybe what we need to be passing around is the original function (which
itself might be a wrapper if the original form was polymorphic) along with
some kind of information about how any abstractly typed values need to be
transformed before calling it. This makes more sense. When we return a
function, we would never be returning this additional information.

Let's try to figure this out. Suppose we have a predicate on integers
(`I64 -> Bool`), and we pass it to a filter function that operates on
some container type (`filter : {a}(a -> Bool, Seq(a)) -> Seq(a)`).
Under the hood, the C type of our predicate is `bool(*)(int64_t)`.
But the filter function must call a function of type `bool(*)(const void*)`.

    struct fn_abs_bool {
      // A pointer to a function, the type is deliberately mangled to be
      // missing the argument since we must cast it anyway.
      bool (*original)(void);
      bool (*apply)(bool(*)(void), const void*);
    };
    bool apply_fn_abs_bool(struct fn_abs_bool fn, const void* arg) {
      // This could just be inlined, but it's written out here
      // for clarity.
      return fn.apply(fn.original, arg);
    }
    bool apply_fn_i64_bool_as_fn_abs_bool(bool(*original)(void), const void* arg) {
      bool(*retyped)(int64_t) = (bool(*)(int64_t))original;
      return retyped(*((int64_t*)arg));
    }
    struct fn_abs_bool fn_i64_bool_to_fn_abs_bool(bool(*original)(int64_t)) {
      return (struct fn_abs_bool){
        .original = (bool(*)(void))original,
        .apply = apply_fn_i64_bool_as_fn_abs_bool
      };
    }

This is ok, but it's missing some things:

* We need to be able to chain these things together. For example, it
  ought to be possible to create a `fn_abs_abs` (not shown) from a
  `fn_abs_bool`. This is going to end up looking like a singly linked list
  that is backed by the stack.
* It is not clear how returning a value with an abstract type should work.
* I'm still not really sure what happens when you return a function.
  Preserving the conversion stuff makes no sense in this case.

I feel like there's a real solution somewhere in here, but I'm just fumbling
around in the dark trying to find it.

Here's a question that I need to resolve. Consider that it's possible to
build a container with a bunch of functions inside it. These functions
may only reference type constants (which makes things simple), or they
may have free variables which refer to something in the containing
function's type signature. Under the system that I've imagined, all of
these functions would need to be represented by something that points
up the stack. But can we actually guarantee that these upward stack
frames will stay live? For more context, let's say that we are working
inside of this function:

    foo : {a}(Array(a -> Bool)) -> Bar

Inside of this function, we can reference any of the existing functions
that are inside the array. And they might actually be functions of type
`Int -> Bool`, but we cannot add any more functions with a type like that.
We could use something like `constTrue : {a}(a) -> Bool` and take it onto
the end of the array. But that does not require any kind of stack-allocated
adapter.

Oh, now I can see an obvious problem. What happens when we do this:

    foo{Int}(myArrayOfPredicates)

Where do all of those adapters go? We cannot rebuild the array. But they
all the use the same adapter. It needs to exist exactly once one the stack.
(Also, think about recursive join points later.) This requires two
characteristics:

1. The "adapter" must be stored separately from the original function.
2. The "apply" function must start at the adapter, not with the original
   function.

These characteristics suggest that the compiler must track a relationship
between free-type-referencing function values (this includes data types that
contain functions) and the adapter corresponding to that type's assignment.
Types are already represented by sizes. Do we need to add something else
to their representation? The relationship between the function value and
the type variable it references is already clear. It's going to be difficult
to pass the correct information into the function though. Consider:

    struct tyrep {
      uint32_t size;
      // Note: The bool(*)(void) function argument is always casted
      // to take an argument of type self
      // (e.g. bool(*)(uint16_t) when self = uint16_t, etc.)
      bool (*apply_self_bool)(bool(*)(void), const void*);
      // This would be: (a) -> I64
      int64_t (*apply_self_i64)(int64_t(*)(void), const void*);
      // This would be: (a, a) -> I64
      int64_t (*apply_self_self_i64)(int64_t(*)(void), const void*);
      // This would be: (a, a, a) -> I64
      int64_t (*apply_self_self_self_i64)(int64_t(*)(void), const void*);
      ...
    };

All of these `apply_self_x` members are populated by functions that lift
a known-argument-type function into an unknown-argument-type setting. So
now, if we have a function of type `a -> Bool`, it is represented at runtime
a function something with an unknown calling convention, but the representation
of type `a` has an adapter for it. We can feed that function into the adapter,
which will apply it to a value of type `void*`.

What's the problem? Well, `tyrep` needs an infinite number of members. Also,
it's not clear what to do for a function argument that references multiple
type variables like `map` or `fold`. Maybe stack the adapters on top of each
other? I think that would work. What about return values? It's got to be done
by either returning into an XMM register or using an out parameter. The
out parameter makes the most sense.

What about the issue of having a struct with an infinite number of members?
This seems impossible to fix. If we preserve the original function all the
way down, then we are going to end up with a lot of possible adapters for it.

# Function Adapters

I thought about this some more. It's still not a totally working idea, but
I'll go over what I've managed to think through. The number of free type
variables is not particularly important. Let's say that we are calling
a function `foo` that has this type: `(a, b, Int) -> Bool`. The type
variables `a` and `b` have some kind of representation available at
runtime. This needs to be some kind of index that we can look up in
a table. There is a global table for each arity used to find function
adapters. At arity 3, the keys look like:

    abs, I64, I64
    abs, abs, I64 (this is the one matching our function)
    I64, abs, I64
    abs, I32, abs
    etc.

We find the match, which is easy because we know it compile time. The
value here is a second table. They keys in this table are all of the
possible pairs of type variable instantiations:

    I64, I64 (adapts: bool(*)(int64_t, int64_t, int64_t))
    I64, I32 (adapts: bool(*)(int64_t, int32_t, int64_t))
    I64, Arr (adapts: bool(*)(int64_t, struct array, int64_t))

This strategy has two serious problems.

The first problem is that there is no simple way to compute, at compile time,
which adapters are needed. Part of the reason for this is that a function can
pass through several phases of known types being replaced by skolems as it is
passed deeper into the call stack.

The second problem is that this entire strategy does not work in cases where
a polymorphic function is called by instantiating a type argument with a
skolem. In this case, the original function needs the type representation
as an argument.

Think about this more.

# Confirming Calling Convention for char[16]

I ran this through gcc 16 with optimization level `-Os` to make sure that
I understood the calling convention correctly:

  struct opaque { char data[16]; };
  struct opaque square(int choice, struct opaque a, struct opaque b) {
    return (choice == 0) ? a : b;
  }

And we can see that it does return these in registers:

    "square":
        test    edi, edi
        mov     rax, rcx
        mov     rdi, rdx
        mov     rdx, r8
        jne     .L3
        mov     rax, rsi
        mov     rdx, rdi
    .L3:
        ret

# How Does punpcklqdq Compile?

Another compiler check:

    __m128i combine_numbers(uint64_t a, uint64_t b) {
      return _mm_set_epi64x(a, b);
    }

This turns into:

    "combine_numbers":
        movq    xmm0, rsi
        movq    xmm1, rdi
        punpcklqdq      xmm0, xmm1
        ret

And if we are instead setting the high bits to zero, we get something even
less expensive:

    __m128i combine_numbers(uint64_t b) {
      return _mm_set_epi64x(0, b);
    }

This is lowered to:

    "combine_numbers":
        movq    xmm0, rdi
        ret
