# Second-Class Types for Mutation and In-Place Freezing

Suppose that mutation is available as an effect via the big arrow (=>).
What if anything mutable had to be a second-class value? We could have
an in-place freeze like this:

    withMutable : (Int, a, MutableArray a {2} => Unit) -> Array a
    write       : (MutatleArray a {2}, Int, a) -> Unit

This is just useful for mutable arrays that are going to be frozen.
It is impossible for the mutable array to escape in `withMutable`, even
in the presence of closures.

We still need to support mutable arrays that are not frozen. This is
not difficult. They can be created like this:

    newMutable : a => MutableArray a

The result is a first-class mutable array.

This also works for other data types, not just arrays.

In `withMutable`, should the function-typed argument itself be marked
as first class or second class? I'm starting to see how this system
might break down. The problem is that there might be a function
like this:

    foo : (MutableBar {2}, Bool) -> Bool

The type signature suggests that `foo` cannot mutate its `MutableBar` argument.
(In fact, the argument cannot be used in any meaningful way by the function.)
If `withMutable` expects its function argument to be first class, then the
implementation of `foo` could not call `withMutable` to gain read-write
access to the `MutableBar`. However, we would still be in a bad position
in this situation (where the `MutableBar` is never frozen):

    foo : (MutableBar {1}, Bool) -> Bool

Whenever we temporarily gain the ability to mutate, we need all existing
mutable values to be purged from the context. Haskell accomplishes this
in a heavy-handed way (universal quantification), and I'm hoping that
there is a more simple answer.

One simple answer is to make mutation available everywhere. I do not like
this because it makes reasoning about functions more difficult.

Let's move on to a different idea.

# Second-Class Types for Regions

Since I'm already trying to avoid tricks with universal quantification,
it's worth asking if there is a way to apply this to regions. This does
not work well for mutation, and it seems like it really won't work for
regions. Here are some issues:

* Regions expect that nested values live in the same region
* Functions have to be able to return region-allocated data

# Possible Solution

There is a simple answer to the "array mutation" problem, which is
to embrace the universal-quantification trick:

    withMutable : (Int, a, Function{s}[Mut(s)](MutableArray s a {2}) -> Unit) -> Array a

The mutation effect is only good for the fresh array, so we aren't able to
mutate extra stuff that might be in scope.

It's possible to use linear types instead:

    withMutable : (Int, a, MutableArray a {1} -> MutableArray a) -> Array a

Linear types are only good for creating arrays that are getting frozen.
They are not good for creating larger mutable data structures involving
multiple nodes.
