# More Thoughts Integer Compression

I've been playing with a simple integer compression scheme. I described
a lot of its properties on 2026-04-20. There are several things that I
have discovered as I have been implementing it:

* The x86 instructions PDEP and PEXT are very cool. I have been able
  to use "bit deposit" with the patch mask to move all of the patch
  results into the right place for the result mask.
* I've thought some about how to use vector instructions to improve
  things. What's strange is that I would probably use vector instructions
  in an unusual way. I want a single code path, not one path for each
  bit width. Also, the scheme that I'm using compresses data down to bit
  widths that are less than 8 bits. Vector instruction sets don't have
  instructions for treating data as 4-bit integers, and even if they
  did, the decompression routine would need to take a separate path for
  each of the 7 admissible bit widths. I think that what would make
  the most sense is to load a 64-bit "group" of compressed elements,
  broadcast this group into a vector register, and then shift-and-mask
  to extract the correct elements from the group. A 256-bit vector
  can hold 4 64-bit elements, so we could pull up to 4 elements at
  a time. That could only happen when the element size was 16 bits
  or less. I would need to figure out how to deal with 32-bit and
  64-bit elements correctly.
* This is where a larger block size could be helpful. Right now, I
  can assume that the bitpacked portion of a block is 64-bit aligned
  and that it contains a total of some multiple of 64 bits. If blocks
  had 256 elements instead of 64, I increase the alignment and size
  assumptions to 256 bits. Then I could load a full 256 bits at a
  time. I'm not sure exactly how to use a broadcast to get the right
  data into the right place though. I need to duplicate certain
  groups or possibly just duplicate one into all of the places.
