# Integer Compression Notes

I have experimented with a simple integer compression scheme recently.
It has these characteristics:

* The algorithm only compresses blocks of exactly 64 elements
* Elements are bitpacked (only power-of-two bit sizes are supported)
* There is an optional base element. If the base element is present,
  all of the "elements" are actually offsets.
* Patches are supported. Patches are also bitpacked but with a different
  bit size. If any patches are present, there is a patch mask that is
  exactly 64 bits.
* The base (if present) and the patches must be the same size.
* The base is not applied to the patches.
* There is a 16-bit piece of metadata that stores the size and
  compression settings for the compressed block.

This scheme works well for things like network byte counts. Already,
I'm able to observe that compression is on par with gzip in this case.
But unlike gzip, this scheme should make it possible to perform common
queries and aggregations of the data without materializing decompressed
data into a large buffer.

The compression ratio of this scheme is much worse than gzip when
compressing IPv4 addresses (represented as 32-bit words, not as text).
This is because IPv4 addresses, in netflow, tend to be distributed
more randomly with a small number of addresses repeated many times.
For this type of data, I need dictionary compression.

It should be possible for dictionaries to work almost just like
bitpacked data. The main difference is that each element represents
an index into a dictionary rather than an offset from a base. I suspect
that patching will still be an important feature. We want the dictionary
indices to use a small number of bits, so we do not want to inflate the
dictionary with elements that only appear once or twice. Here are
some fields that will need to be stored in the metadata:

* Total size of block (as with bitpacking): 7 bits
* Compression type: 1 bit
* Patch set presence: 1 bit
* Logarithm (base 2) of dictionary size: 2 bits (only bit sizes: 1, 2, 4)
* Logarithm (base 2) of element size (patch element and dictionary element): 3 bits

With dictionary compression, is it worth bothering with an optional
base element? I suspect that it's not. What would it apply to? The
dictionary-compressed values? The patches? Both? The only scenario
that I can think of where this feature would be helpful is IPv4-mapped
IPv6 addresses. In that situation, you can end up with a lot of addresses
in the `::ffff:0:0/96` block, so it could be helpful to set the base
as `::ffff:0:0`. But it's already possible to do that with the other
scheme, so I'm not sure that feature is needed here.

Let's consider another issue: the restriction on dictionary sizes.
Currently, the indices have to be represented by 1, 2, or 4 bits. This
makes alignment work out nicely. Losing the 3-bit option hurts is
unfortunate (just like when compressing offsets), but I believe that
the resulting simplicity is worth it. There is no reason to support
zero-bit dictionary offsets. This case is already covered by bitpacked
fields.

If there are no patches, it should be possible for the dictionary
element list to be shorter than the indices suggest. Why? Suppose
that we have a 4-bit index but only 10 distinct elements. There is
no need to waste that extra space. Crucially, it is never useful
to use patches if the dictionary is not full.

# File Format

I thought about this a little recently. Here are a few notes:

* It would be nice if it were possible to append to existing files.
  The traditional big-data solution to this is "just make more
  files and union them in software". I would love to have a different
  solution available.
* There are several ways to accomplish that goal. One way is to
  split metadata and blocks into two separate files. Another way
  is to use hole punching to leave blank space in the middle of
  a file.
* To support random access, it will be necessary to store absolute
  positions of certains blocks (e.g. every 256th block) in
  some other part of the file. You can combine this position with
  a sum of the metadata sizes to quickly find a block's position.
* Any file format should keep both POSIX file systems and object
  storage in mind. It would be nice for something to work well with
  either of these.

# Alignment And 128-Bit Fields

I need to start thinking ahead to see if I can figure this out.
What should the alignment requirements be for blocks of 128-bit elements?
I've made several choices already that imply a strong 64-bit bias.
These choices are:

* There are 64 elements in every block (causes offsets to naturally
  sum to a total of some mulitple of 64 bits)
* The patch mask has 64 bits (works naturally with 64-bit alignment)

The thing that I've tried to avoid is needing alignment padding inside of
a block. Having some padding at the end is fine, but I do not want
it anywhere else. It makes certain offset calculations difficult,
and it's only in edge cases where things go wrong.
I've moved the patch mask up to the front of the block because
we need it to figure out where the base element is. But if I had just
put the base element before the patch elements (instead of after),
this wouldn't have been necessary. The position of everything
would be predicted by the metadata (which is a desirable property).
We could change the order to be:

* Primary elements (i.e. offsets or raw elements, 64-bit aligned)
* Patch mask (optional, 64 bits)
* Base (optional, M bits)
* Patch elements (optional, M bits each)

The 64-bit setting still works fine. But do things get any better for
the 128-bit setting? Not really. The primary elements still do not
have the right alignment guarantee. The most simple option that
I can think of is to remove the "values are near zero" assumption
from the 64-bit variant. IPv6 addresses, UUIDs, and MD5 hashes
(the three common 128-bit uses of unsigned integers in my experience)
are not typically anywhere near zero. This means that the trick
for packing base elements and patch elements into a small number
of bits is unlikely to be helpful. If this feature is removed,
then the base and patch elements could appear at the beginning,
not the end. Then the alignment of everything would work out nicely.
I'm almost certain that this is what I should do. (Actually, I have
noticed a problem. We cannot tell how many patch elements there
are without first reading the patch mask. I need to think through
this more.)

However, moving the base element to be before the patch elements,
even in the 64-bit scenario, is a great idea. I think I'm going
to go ahead and change this. (Actually, I started to do this, and
I do not like how it makes the patch elements begin with non-64-bit
alignment, so I don't actually think I will go through with it.) 
