# Huffman Code Control Bits

StreamVByte is essentially a variant of LEB128 that separates the control bits
and the data bits. Can the same be done for Huffman codes? The biggest
difference between these two settings is that StreamVByte has an obvious bound
on the number of control bits needed. Every 32-bit integer's length is at most 4,
so we only need 2 control bits for each of them.

Huffman codes can be bounded. For example, we might be able to guarantee that
a dictionary has no more than 256 elements. We will assume that here.

The interesting thing about moving the control bits around is that we end up
homogenizing the shapes of Huffman trees somewhat, but not entirely. Let's say
that we have 1 control bit per value. The means that we can only communicate
two possible data lengths. Maybe these are 2 and 5. So the more common values
take 2 bits and the less common values take 5 bits. Really, plus one in each
case because the control bit still matters. But the data lengths could have been
1 and 6 instead. Or 3 and 4. Or 2 and 4. Anything really, although a reasonable
convention would be that the first one is the smallest. At 2 control bits per
word, we get better control over fanout but with greater overhead. The maximum
that makes sense is 3 control bits per word. At this point, you've got every
single integer less than 8 covered. However, I do not this that supporting
three control bits per word is necessary. Two control bits per word gives us
four possible lengths, which is plenty. Zero control bits implies that all data
words are the same length. This is useful when they are distributed evenly.

Let's see how this might work. Suppose that we have already established a
dictionary mapping unique values to natural numbers. The most commonly
occurring value gets assigned to the number zero. The second most commonly
occurring values get assign to one. And so on.

Essentially, what's going on here is that we are encoding values from a
contiguous subset of the integers. This set starts at zero and ends at
something less than 256.

Suppose that we are encoding exactly 256 indices. I'll refer to this as
a block. Here is one way to represent this:

* How many control bits are there for each word (0-3). I refer to this as C.
* An array of 2^C 4-bit integers. This is the shape of the tree.
* An array of control bits. The size, in bits, is 256 * C.
* The data bits. It is not possible to predict where a value starts. It is
  not even possible to prevent data bits from spanning 64-bit words.

This has the undesirable characteristic of requiring unaligned loads from
the array of data bits. You'd have to work through the control bits, probably
consuming 4 elements at a time (maybe 8) and track the current byte and bit
offset in the data array. Maybe this is not as bad as I think it is. This
is basically how streamvbyte works (but here we go down to the bit level
and streamvbyte is only at the byte level).

## Approach A

Let's try this out with just 4 elements at a time. Suppose that there are
2 control bits per word. Suppose our array of control words is 1, 0, 0, 3.
And the interpretations of these should be:

* 0: 1
* 1: 3
* 2: 4
* 3: 6

We need to end up building a deposit mask that looks like this:

    00111111 00000001 00000001 00000111

But how do we get the mask? Our interpretation vector can be thought of
this (and precomputing this is fine because it is shared across the
decompression loop):

    00111111 00001111 00000111 00000001

The obvious choice is something like `PSHUFB`, but that requires moving
data into XMM registers. That's probably the best option. Plus we could
go ahead and get the interpretations into the XMM register before the
decompression loop. So at each step, we would do this:

* Load 4 control words (in this example, just 8 bits total)
* Use bit-deposit operation (pdep) to pad control words into 8-bit units
* Move this from GPR into XMM register
* Use PSHUFB to translate these 4 8-bit padded control words into 8-bit masks
* Move this result from an XMM register to a GPR
* Load a 64-bit word of data bits, possibly shifting to the right to erase
  bits from a previous load.
* Use bit extract to apply the 4 8-bit masks to the data bits. The end result
  is 4 8-bit integers.

It would be nice if we could always pull 8 control words at a time instead
of 4. The only thing that makes this impossible is the alignment problem.
There might be a few bits from the beginning that need to be shaved off.
In the worst case, we need to proceess 8 8-bit data units, so we could end
up needing slightly more than 64 bits. The only way to fix this is to
provide a better alignment guarantee. And the only way to do that is by
padding data-bit-units out to byte boundaries.

Padding out data-bit-units has a bunch of sharp edge cases where it can
increase required storage considerably. Specifically, consider the case
where the most common control word indicates that 1 bit is needed from the
data stream. If we end up with something like 9 bits in a data-bit-unit,
that will get padded out to 16 bits, which nearly doubles the required
storage.

## Approach B

Let's see if we can avoid BMI2 instructions. This would improve the algorithm
in several ways:

* Vector registers are bigger, so it might be possible to process more
  elements at a time.
* Moving data around between vector registers and GPRs is slow.

Lets say that we are using the same example from before. The interpretation
vector looks like this:

* 0: 1
* 1: 3
* 2: 4
* 3: 6

Let's assume that we just have XMM (128-bit) vector registers, not YMM
registers. Before the loop starts:

* Load an XMM register with the interpretations. Each of the 4 32-bit lanes
  gets an integer.

On each iteration of the loop, we do this: 

* Resolve the control words to bitwidths with `VPERMILPS` (via the intrinsic `_mm_permutevar_ps`)
  in an XMM register.
* Turn bitwidths into shift amounts (a prefix sum). This cannot be performed in
  a single step. This result needs to end up in a YMM register.
* Load and broadcast 64 bits of data across the 4 64-bit lanes of a YMM register.
* Bitshift to the right.
* Extract the low 8 bits of each of the 4 64-bit lanes. This is the result.

What doesn't work well here:

* We still get burned by the poor data-alignment guarantee. We should be able
  to process twice as much data at a time, but we can't because there might
  be something that we've already process wasting our low data bits.
* Prefix sum is slow. I ran into this same problem when working with
  streamvbyte. BMI instructions avoid this because of how bit deposit works.

## Analysis

Any strategy that encodes variable-width elements adjacent to one another
runs into problems with SSE/AVX. Once you have AVX512 with VBMI (or maybe
VBMI2), these issues start to disappear, but requiring this kind of hardware
support is a nonstarter. ARM and RISCV are not going in this same direction,
and even most new Intel processors do not support AVX512.

Is there another way? If adjacent elements have the same width, everything
is much easier. The shift vectors can just be precomputed. The different widths
would need to be stored in different arrays. The hard part is then blending
everything together. Suppose we have two array. One array has 1-bit elements
and the other has 4-bit elements. Within either array, we know the order of
the elements, but it's not clear how they should be ordered relative to one
another. Actually, no, it's not complicated. We just need the array of 1-bit
control words to tell us which array to pull from at each step.

Suppose that we need to process 8 elements:

* Pull 8 control bits. This cursor stays byte aligned.
* Load a 64-bit word from each data stream.
* With BMI2, bit extract from each data stream and merge the results with
  bitwise or. 

The cursors into the data streams do not stay byte aligned for 1-bit, 2-bit,
and 4-bit data streams, but the cursor into an 8-bit data stream does stay
aligned.

Here are the problems with this strategy:

* I do not like losing access to 5-bit and 6-bit data streams. This is a
  considerable loss of compression. Actually, we might not need to lose
  access to these. For the 1/2/4-bit stream, we are already not able to
  stay byte aligned.
* This works fine when there are just two tiers. It will not work when we
  have four tiers. We need to have just ones and zeros for the bit-extract
  instruction to work. 

This isn't too bad. It would be nice to have access to more tiers, but two
tiers is still nice.

## Simple-8b Compression

The integer compression algorithm known as simple-8b is indeed simple.
Integers are packed into 64-bit words. Four bits are the "selector", which
tells you how many bits are used for each integer. The other 60 bits are the
payload. You always end up using as many bits as the worst case requires.
So if you need have several numbers that only need 3 bits and then one that
requires 10 bits, you'll probably end up padding everything out to 10 bits.
Depending on your distribution of integers, this strategy could compress
very effectively or ineffectively.

The simplicity of simple-8b is nice, but I don't like the approximation that
it makes. It's just too easy for it to end up expanding a small integer into
something larger.

## Reordering and Sorting

Some literature on integer compression algorithms talks about sorting data
before compressing it. I assume that this refers to data that is being
treating as a set, not a list. For lists, the way I think about it is that
the position itself is part of the data. So if you reorder a sequence
in order to compress it, you must then encode the reordering as well.

## One Byte at a Time

One of the reasons that I'm thinking about breaking integers apart into
8-bit units is that it works as a strategy for encoding fixed-length
strings as well. Unfortunately, it rearranges the data in a way that
is likely to make it less useful. For 32-bit integers and 64-bit integers,
we typically have to put everything back together to actually do anything
with the data.
