# Another Approach to Unified Block Compression

Here's the idea:

* Every compressed block has a dictionary. This dictionary has all of
  the distinct elements. It is a trie (just a set in this case), so
  the elements are ordered, but the positions are used elsewhere as
  indices into the dictionary.
* In addition to the dictionary, there is an array of indices into
  the dictionary. There are exactly 64 of these (or maybe 256 if I
  want to change the block size). How many bits each index requires
  depends on how many elements are in the trie.

That's basically it. It's similar to the dictionary scheme that I had
already been doing but with more space-efficient storage for the
dictionary elements.

It inherits a lot of the same problems though. One problem is that
having lots of distinct elements inflates the size of the indices.
I had solved this before with patching. But it's not a great solution.
The result is a system where there are exactly two tiers. It would be
nice if things were more granular. For example, consider Huffman codes.
In that system, the most frequently occurring elements get low bit
counts, and then the bit counts gradually increase as the frequencies
decrease. 

What if everything is in the trie and then the indices, which become
the alphabet, are Huffman coded? That might work. We would need to
store the Huffman tree, the trie, and the encoded indices. Traditional
prefix codes do not seem to play nicely with any kind of bit-level
parallelism, so we could rig the distribution to always follow an
exponentially decaying pattern. This would make the Huffman tree much
easier to encode.

Instead of a traditional form of prefix codes, we could put the size
metadata and the meaningful data into two separate arrays:

    1 0 1 1 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0
    |-------|---|---|-|-|-|-|-|---|-------|
    2       1   1   0 0 0 0 0 1   2

Each size is a 2-bit integer (between 0 and 3, inclusive), and it is
the base-2 logarithm of the number of bits required in the the bit
array above it. We end up with alignment problems. I do not want
a bitcode to span two 64-bit words, but the system I've just suggested
does not naturally result in bitcodes aligned to any particular boundary.

Aside from the alignment problem, there is another issue. The bitcode
distributions are a bad choice for elements that are distributed more
uniformly (e.g. suppose there are 12 distinct elements that each have
similar counts). This is fixable. The size metadata could offer another
interpretation: 1 bit per size, where the value V determines the size
of the bitcode with `bitcode_size = 2^(V+1)`. So we would only have
bit sizes 4 and 8 in that case. Although, strangely, the bit size 4
ends up consuming 3 bits (2 bits for index plus 1 bit for metadata),
but this is the same size as the 3 bits required by the original
arrangement (1 bit for index plus 2 bits for metadata).

# Standardize Framing

Let's take a step back. How can I even really compare two different block
encodings? I need to be able to chain together thousands (or millions) of
blocks to build out a full column, and then I could get a meaningful
comparison of compression ratios and query performance.

Effectively, the framing needs to be parameterized by the block encoding.
We need a decompress function, and then we can probably have optional
overrides for various predicates (everything can be defaulted to "decompress
and then query the decompressed values" if no specialization is available).
We need a few things to stay constant though:

* Block size. The block size has to be set in stone. If a block has 64 elements,
  the return type of predicate evaluations is `uint64_t`. If a block has 256
  elements, the returned mask needs to happen through an out paramater.
* Metadata size. Part of the metadata always needs to be a count of the
  number of bytes (or 64-bit words) used to represent the block. And then
  the rest of it can be helpful stuff that is difficult to align and that
  is useful to inspect without loading the block. In the scheme that I had
  worked on, I had been able to get the metadata down to 16 bits. This
  limit might not be acceptable for other schemes. Also, there were several
  times when I wished that I had the patch mask available in the metadata,
  even though that's a full 64 bits and it's not even always used. It would
  make it so that I could print out the patch count when dumping metadata.

If the block size is anything greater than 64, we would use an out parameter.
But this means that block sizes of 128, 256, or 512 are could all be supported
by the framing layer. I still think that it's probably best to just nail down
one specific size because it's going to make the code for boolean connectives
better (e.g. on x86, even old SSE has instructions like `_mm_and_si128`).

I think that a block size greater than 64 will be necessary. All of the
integer compression algorithms with the best compression ratios have block
sizes greater than 64.

One option that the framing stuff leaves open is the ability to compress
groups of blocks using a traditional compression algorithm. I really hope
that I can just compress data well enough to avoid needing to do this
though. It seems like more complication.
