# New Representation of Compressed Integers

After thinking through this on 2026-05-28, I've decided that I like the
idea of storing equal-position bits together for integers. Someone must
have come up with this idea before, but I'm not aware of any prior work.
The important unresolved question is how to deal with patches.

In PFOR, patched coding builds a linked list in the data bits. This makes
good use of the available bits, but this does not vectorize and implies
random access. I'd rather just indicate exceptions with an "all ones"
bit pattern.

If our data is supposed to be clustered around zero, it makes sense to
encode patches with something like LEB128.

The way that I'm thinking about doing dictionaries, the patches would
actually just be indices, and those would unconditionally be encoded
with 8 bits. What about the dictionary elements themselves? Let's think
about some common cases for dictionaries: ip addresses, mac addresses,
transport number, miscellaneous IDs (rule ID, doc ID, employee ID, etc.),
network port number (16 bits). In many cases, these are not clustered
around zero, but in a few cases they are. What I think makes the most
sense is to encode all of them with the same number of bytes. For
something like an IPv4 address, this is always going to end up being
4 bytes (unless all of the addresses are in the 0.0.0.0/8 range).
But we might have domain-specific identifiers that technically have
a 32-bit range but in practice only use that first 8, 16, or 24 bits
of that range, and for these, it's nice to save the space.

What about things that are supposed to be clustered around zero?
We could just do the same thing for the patch elements and use the
largest integer to decide how many bytes to use for each of them.
This is a little more wasteful here though. It's much more likely
that this will result in a significant number of zeros in the upper
bytes. We could use a variant of streamvbyte (without any vectorization
support) for this, and any extra elements could be encoded as the number
zero. This way, the patches could be unpacked quickly into a small
array of 64-bit integers.

# Stings as Integers

I've been thinking about how to deal with strings. There are a lot of
strings used as identifiers that are both case insensitive and short.
ASCII has 95 printable characters. If we subtract 26 to remove
uppercase characters duplication, that brings us down to 69 characters.
We would have to pick out a few more characters to prohibit to bring
this down to 64 characters, and that would be 6 bits per character.
In situations where only alpha characters were needed, we could get
even further down to 5 bits per characters, which would make it
possible to pack 12 characters into a 64-bit word.

Here are several types of data that I have dealt with that could possibly
be handled this way: host names, interface names, user names, firewall
rule names. A lot of these are fields that have some kind of externally
imposed upper bound on the character count, often 255 characters.

I do not like how arrow and parquet deal with strings. In arrow, there
are dictionaries, which are helpful for saving space. If you are working
with a string type where you expect duplicates, you almost certainly
want a dictionary encoding. What I don't like is the poor composition.
Without dictionaries, the it's trivial to combine record batches
by just pasting one after then next. But with dictionaries, this is
no longer an obvious choice. It often makes sense to combine the
two dictionaries (eliminating duplication), which requires rewriting
all of the indices.

This model complicates data consumption. Instead of record batches,
there are also dictionary batches. Any data consumer has to be prepared
for these. It's effectively another data container that you have to be
able to work through to get to the data that you're trying to access.

What are some alternatives:

* Represent strings as 64-bit words. This only works in pretty narrow
  cases. You need a small character set and an low upper bound on length.
  These longest that a string can possibly be is 12 characters.
* Represent strings as 128-bit hashes and assume no collisions. This leads
  to a system with unusual characteristics. You can query the data for exact
  matches, but you cannot actually look at the data.
* No compression. Use something like arrow's variable-sized binary layout,
  but cap the length of an individual string at 255. This would cut down on
  overhead. We would still have dictionaries, but the dictionaries would
  just be associated with the format's 256-element blocks. This could result
  in considerable duplication if there were a large number of distinct
  elements that tended to repeat at intervals greater than the block size.
* Push the burden onto the user and have them list out all possible values
  in the schema. In many cases, this is not possible. For example, it is
  not possible to know all usernames that a system is expected to handle.

None of these feel like satisfying answers. Ideally, it should be possible
to just turn a string into a single integral identifier and then get to use
that identifier everywhere. But I don't want to have to consult a global
table before getting to run a query.

Maybe the hash thing is fine. But with an added caveat that there is global
table that lives outside of any of the individual files, and this table has
all of the hash-to-original-string mappings. It would need to be updated
(somehow) as new strings appeared, but this same table would be shared by all
occurrences of the same column across multiple files. This means that we can
only query for exact matches, not prefixes, but I think that's fine.

It would be nice to not have to store the full 16-byte hash every time the
string was recorded in a block. In many cases, the hash is probably longer
than the string would have been! However, it's difficult to avoid this. We
cannot just store the prefix that distinguishes it from other entries because
the hash table may grow in the future.
