# Bottom-Up Parsing

Look at the Bottom-Up Parsing handout from CS143 (written by Maggie Johnson,
revised by Julie Zelenski) for a good description of bottom-up parsing. The
handout works through the LR(0) table for a simple grammar, but it's detailed
enough that I was able to follow what was going on. I feel like I now understand
how the table-driven evaluation of an LR(0) grammar works. Actually building the
table is another matter. The handout covers that too, but I did not read that
part thoroughly.

# Compressing Keyword Strings

On 2026-05-29, I thought about how to deal with strings. For the moment, my plan
is just to build a registry mapping each string to an integer. This way, strings
can just be 4-byte integers in most cases. This works fine when all data is
processed at once, which is what happens in an incident-response situation.

# Blocks with 256 Elements

Still thinking about strategies for compressing integers. On 2026-05-29,
I arrived at a general strategy: grouping bits that are of the same order.
The compression ratio for this should be good, and it's possible to vectorize
predicate evaluation in a way that uses the same code path for integers of
any bit width. (That's a big deal to me.)

I'm having a hard time deciding on the block size. Patching is supported,
which makes 64 elements a natural choice. With either lzcnt or tzcnt, we can
work through the patch mask and grab the elements.

However, a larger block size lets us exploit vector registers that tend
to be available on modern processors. With 256 elements, we can make much
better use of x86 hardware (and somewhat better use of ARM hardware, which
often has 128-bit vector operations available). The problem is that patching
becomes more confusing. There is no 256-bit tzcnt on any system, so we would
need to do something different. We could loop through the 4 64-bit components
one by one, but I don't like this. We could just store the patch indices as
8-bit integers. This is simple to process, but it makes poor use of our
precious bytes.

What bothers me most of all is that there is not a good way to vectorize
processing of the patch elements (and this also applies to dictionary elements).
The non-patched elements work nicely because we know exactly know many
of them there are. One of the worst thing about SIMD programming is the
"handle the tail" part at the end that switches back from vector instructions
to GPR instructions. Some newer instruction sets address this issue with
mask registers, but this feature is not widely available.

Another issue with patch/dictionary elements is that it is no longer possible
to use the homogenized representation for integers of different bit widths.
The most compelling example that keeps convincing me to not attempt this
is "what if there is just one element". The bit-order-grouped representation
needs a lot of padding to make that case work. Also, evaluating a predicate
on just an element could be up to 64x slower than it should be. It could
turn a single equality-test instruction into 64 of them.

Maybe it makes sense to just have a separate code path for each patch bitwidth.
Or really bytewidth since I don't think it makes sense to support patches that
are less than one byte. One nice thing is that all byte width less than or
equal to 8 could share a code path (64-bit load and then mask), and then
everything greater than 8 could perform a `memcmp`. This is slow, but over time,
it would be possible to provide specializations for common sizes like 16.  
