# Different Kinds of Undefined Behavior

On 2025-09-03, I described changing my mind about undefined behavior.
Now, I'll describe an undefined behavior that I think is dangerous
for users to have access to: unchecked array freezing. Promising that
an array is immutable and still having mutable access to the backing
memory is dangerous.

Here's another UB that I do not like: access to uninitialized array
elements. There are at least two difficulties that I am aware of:

* It's hard to sanitize a program to detect this. It requires allocating
  a bitmask alongside the array to track which elements have been initialized.
* Users have different expectations about what is safe and what is unsafe
  depending on the element type. For example, reading an uninitialized element
  from an array of 32-bit integers will (unless some kind of sanitizer is
  in place) give you a random integer. You could store this in a slot in
  another array or move it around in memory, and as long as you did not
  read this "poisoned" value, your program would still be deterministic.
  However, if the element is a managed pointer, even bringing it into
  existence can be dangerous. The runtime (even something simple like
  automatic RC) might write to it, which would lead to either SIGSEGV
  or memory corruption.

This gets at another sanitizer philosophy. Any kind of sanitizer that has
to change the ABI is difficult to build.

# Pointers

There are some good thoughts on pointers from 2025-12-19. Something that
really bothers me about `Expr` in those examples is that we have to write
out the `r` type variable twice to get a usable type:

    Ref(Expr@r)@r

The outer occurrence means "this one object is in region r" and the inner
occurrence means that all of the children of `Expr` are in region r.

The problem is the overloaded meaning of the at sign. I've ended up
giving it two meanings:

1. Pair a struct-like type with a region
2. Pass a region argument to a data type for its children to inherit (this is
   actually the meaning that a end up settling on at the end of this section)

The first meaning is much more important. The second one can be accomplished
without any special syntax. And yet, I still want both of these. I really
want for `Expr@r` to be a usable type. Writing anything more than this is
a bad experience for a user.

One problem is that types like `Vec3` are, in a sense, usable without a region.
And types like `Expr` are not. But types like `Vec3` are not common. If a data
type has a string or an array anywhere in it, it's going to need to care
about where that data is stored. Plus, even if we have a type like `Vec3`,
it's probably stored in another object on the heap (likely in an array).

This is where it gets odd. In theory, it's possible to have an array of
pointers to `Vec3` objects. But it's also possible to have an array of
`Vec3` where they are unpacked directly into the array (and that's what
you typically want). So, should `Vec3@r` be a pointer or something flat?
We really need for `Expr@r` to be a pointer. If it's not, if we have to
write `Ptr(Expr@r)`, then we end up with some weird upcasting issues.
In theory, we ought to be able to create a child type like `Leaf@r`
as something that is struct-like. But the problem is that we could
create `Array(Leaf@r)@r`, which makes sense, but then we could turn
that into `Array(Expr@r)@r`, which does not make sense, because `Expr`
does not have a known size. If `Leaf@r` and `Expr@r` always refer to
pointers instead, this is all fine.

Different types could just work differently. This would mostly be fine
except that it makes indexing into arrays strange:

    index : {r,a}(Array(a)@r, Int) -> Ptr(a)@r

Maybe this isn't too bad. It's a little strange that our `index` function
isn't actually reading anything from the array. And that means that for
types like `Expr`, what it returns is a double indirection.

And this is basically the system that I originally deviated from months ago.
I think that trying to use Ptr (or Ref) to capture how ADTs are boxed was
a mistake.

We do need a magically overloaded dereference function though:

    dereference.i64  : Ptr(I64)@r -> I64
    dereference.i32  : Ptr(I32)@r -> I32
    dereference.expr : Ptr(Expr@s)@r -> Expr@s

Basically, if we have a pointer to any primitive type, we can dereference
it. And if we have a pointer to a boxed type, we ought to be able to
dereference that too. I'm not sure about pointers to struct-like types.

I'm still just not crazy about this design. I never want to end up
with types like `Ptr(Expr@s)@r`.

Maybe the tension that I'm experiencing is because I'm trying to provide
greater control of boxing and indirections that most languages with
managed memory do. In many language implementations, everything (including
integers) just gets boxed. So a value with an abstract type is known to
be boxed. I'm making that boxing more explicit. I have to because these
function types are incompatible:

    I64 -> Bool
    Ptr(I64)@r -> Bool

And I think that part is good. These are not the same type, and it is
ridiculous to require that the integer argument is boxed.

But to compile a polymorphic function (without relying on monomorphization),
you have to use indirection. The argument might be indirected, or maybe
the return value is indirected, or maybe both.

Whenever we talk about `Vec3@r`, we should be dealing with a pointer (just
like with `Expr@r`. The only reason to deal with the unboxed version of
`Vec3@r` is when we are feeding it to a data constructor:

    Array(Unpacked(Vec3)@r)@r
    Array(&Vec3@r)@r
    Array(&Vec3)@r

Although `Unpacked` looks like a type constructor, it's not. It's more like
a data family in Haskell. It cannot be applied to abstract types. And it
can only appear when applying a type constructor. There's an outline that
is starting to take shape.

What if the unpacking is handled as a part of type-constructor application?
Something like:

    APP : TyCon -> Type -> Mode -> Type

This is too far outside of commonly practiced theory. Why does `Vec3` need
special syntax? Shouldn't it always be unpacked into an array? Just like
we always unpack `u64` into an array. That solves the problem. We can just
write out:

    Array(Vec3@r)@r
    Array(Vec3)@r

And it does what we expect. Let's look at a few other functions:

    index : {r,a}(Array(a)@r, Int) -> Ptr(a)@r
    write : {r,s,a}(MutableArray(a)@r {1}, Int, Ptr(a)@s) -> MutableArray(a)@r

All of this pointer stuff is painful. What if we just let these be abstract type
variables, but they were represented as pointers under the hood? The biggest
problem with this is that function subtyping would not work at all. For example,
consider something like this:

    map : (a -> b, Array(a)) -> Array(b)

If we pass this a function that increments a 64-bit integer, the calling convention
will be wrong. But what if we just wrap every function?

    uint64_t increment(uint64_t x) { return x + 1; }
    void wrapped_increment(uint64_t* out, const uint64_t* x) { out = increment(*x); }

This works. I need to think about this more. It's not a bad idea.

# Polymorphism in Cyclone

I just found some restrictions on Cyclone's [support for polymorphism](https://pling.jondgoodwin.com/post/cyclone/):

> Cyclone supports parametric polymorphism (generics) on functions and types.
> Despite being constrained to word-sized types and unable to monomorphize,
> this feature is sufficient for supporting type-generic boxed collections.
> Cyclone also supports abstract, existential types, with similar limitations.
> Similar to traits, these allow use of method-like functions across
> differently-implemented concrete types.

Cyclone's own documentation tightens this restriction further (preventing
floating-point numbers):

> The types `a and `b are type variables that can be instantiated with
> any word-sized, general-purpose register type

This is a very simple solution to a problem that has caused me a lot of grief.
What do we lose as a result of this restriction:

* Cannot store Vec3 in an Array or in an arbitrary data type
* Cannot instantiate type variables with Array types (Array needs 16 bytes)
* Cannot store small integer types (u8, u16, etc.) in an array

That's a lot to lose.

# Syntactic Sugar for Eliding Function-Argument Regions

Suppose we have a function like this:

    foo : (Foo, Bar) -> Int

The actual type should be:

    foo : {r}(Foo@r, Bar@r) -> Int

It's also trivial to go the other way. The compiler can identify type
signatures that have the second form and present them with the first form.

There is another way to do this. Supposing that the function allocates,
we might want this:

    bar : [+](Foo, Bar) -> Bar

And this would expand to:

    bar : {r}[+r](Foo@r, Bar@r) -> Bar@r

One thing that is strange about this is that, in the body of the function,
it would be nice if we could reference `r`. Maybe that could just be the
defaulted name, and it's in scope just like any other name would be.

# Better Makefiles

I recently used `make` to manage a C project. I discovered that I don't know
how to use it very well. I can write a bunch of rules by hand, but it's not
very pleasant. I found my way to "Implicit Rules" and "Pattern Rules" on
the documentation for GNU Make. It should be possible to use these to build
a Makefile that just gives you targets for all of the C files without having
to list them one by one.

I'm not sure if it makes sense to link executables as a separate step in
a Makefile. I started thinking about that as I was working on a C project.

The page on pattern rules has this example (involves generating a C file
and a header file based on a grammar):

    %.tab.c %.tab.h: %.y
      bison -d $<

This is neat because the language that I've been thinking about would rely
heavily on generate C files. So, it's nice to know that Make supports this
kind of workflow.

Reading more about this, I think I probably need to learn to use CMake.
It lets you generate a Makefile (or you can use ninja as the backend),
and it can do nice stuff like finding all the files for you.
