# MiniPC Research

The main thing that I am looking for is 4k 120Hz video out over USB-C.
This is what my monitor (S3225QC) supports. I'm happy to stay a few years
behind in hardware, but I don't want something that is unable to take
advantage of a recent monitor.

I've used a video signal bandwidth caculator. For 4K@120Hz, one of these
needs to be true:

* HDMI 2.1 or 2.2
* DisplayPort (DP) 1.4, 40, 54, 80.
* USB-C DP 1.4 Alt Mode (or DP54 or DP80 alt mode)

Here is what I have found:

* Dell OptiPlex 5000 M (2022): Video is only supported on Display Port,
  not USB-C.
* Dell OptiPlex 7020 M (2024): Same problem. There are several reports
  of issues with using USB-C for a monitor. HDMI is only at version 1.4.
* Dell QCM1250 (Pro Micro, 2023-2024): I think this one supports video
  over USB-C. It has USB 3.2. It's a little more expensive than what
  I was hoping to pay.
* Dell only offers the "micro" form factor in their "pro" line of desktops,
  which means that these tend to have way more hardware than what I need.
* Lenovo M720Q (2022): USB 3.1. Needs adapter to connect to monitor. Lenovo's
  are confusing because there are multiple generations for each product.
  Looks like HDMI is at 2.0, which is not sufficient.
* Intel/Asus NUC 13 (March 2023): This seems nice and might make more sense.
  It's still difficult to figure out the whole "monitor over USB-C" situation.
  This has HDMI 2.1.

Intel offers a [spec lookup](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/ark.html)
that shows the integrated graphics card associated with each processor.
Additionally, it shows us the maximum display and resolution.

* NUC 13 has the Intel Iris Xe. This has HDMI 2.1, but it does not support
  4K@120Hz.
* NUC 14 has a Core 3 100U processor, which implies a "Intel Graphics" GPU.
  It has the same limitation HDMI limitation.

I've run a few queries through Claude and confirmed this information:

* The NUC 13 simply does not support 4K@120Hz in any configuration.
* The NUC 14 can support 4K@120Hz over USB-C, but it has to be a model with
  an Ultra processor, not Core 3. An Ultra, which is what's in my work laptop,
  comes with Intel Arc for integrated graphics. The Core 3 comes with
  Intel Graphics instead. The model numbers of NUCs that work start with
  NUC14RVHu5 or NUC14RVHu7 (for Ultra 5 or Ultra 7).

Unfortunately for me, the NUC 14 holds it value pretty well. On ebay, these
sell for $400 or $500 with no hard drive or memory ("barebones").


