# Inspiration for Sparse Patching

I've been thinking about how to support patching on a large column of integers.
Large meaning millions of elements. Typically, I see patching incorporated into
compression schemes that work on small blocks (around 128 elements), and the way
that the data is consumed is that the entire block has to be decompressed before
any of the data is read. I want to be able to work on the data in place.

Let's consider four integer compression strategies:

1. Base-offset encoding, where the offset is encoded using a small number of bits
2. Dictionary encoding, where the index into the dictionary is encoded using a
   small number of bits.
3. Patching, where we have a list of patch elements that need to be applied to
   certain offsets.
4. Repetition-based schemes, including run-length encoding (RLE). RLE is probably
   the most simple repetition-based scheme and is typically used on integers,
   not text. LZ4's algorithm, involving backreferences to earlier slices of
   buffer, is much more effective on text than RLE is.

I want it to be possible to fold over the compressed data from beginning to
end without having to decompress it. Schemes 1 and 2 support this trivially.
In fact, they support constant-time random access, which means that the "fold"
operation requires no state. Additionally, they let the user fold over the data
in a way that produces one element at a time.

Schemes in category 4 are only capable of producing entire chunks at a time.
These reqire some kind of state, and since they require state, they do not
support random access. I don't think that it is possible to incorporate this
kind of scheme into what I'm trying to do.

Scheme 3, patching, is the one that gave me the most trouble. The most obvious
way to represent a patch list is with a list of index-element pairs. But this
requires states when folding and consequently does not support random access.
After thinking about this a while, I realized that there is a way to get what
I want. For the patch elements, it's fine to just store them as an array. We
need a bitset whose population count is equal to the size of the array. The
representation of the bitset needs to be optimized for these operations:

* We need an O(1) membership test (this is simple)
* We need an O(1) rank operation (Rank is defined as: given a list of n bits
  and an index i, return the sum of all the bits up to position i in the list)
* We need to compress the structure since it should be sparse.

I read up on succinct data structures and realized that it's possible to
use prefix sums for an O(1) rank operation. This needs to be paired with some
kind of strategy for compressing a sparse bit set. The bit set will typically
be sparse in this setting. The next section talks about one possibility for
combining these.

What's neat about schemes 1, 2, and 3 is that they are trivial to combine.
It's possible to just add the three decompressed values together to get
a result. It's also simple to support vectorized processing. All of these
schemes support loading adjacent elements into vector registers.

# Compressing Sparse Patches

Thinking about patching.

* Maximum number of elements in column: 4 billion (32-bit indexes)
* blocks of 32 bits (for prefix sum)
* 1M elements
* Total bitset size: 1Mb = 128KB
* Total prefix sum size: (1M / 32) * 4B = 128KB
* Total size: 256KB
* Cost per item: 2 bits (not bad)
* Cost to look up rank(i): O(1), assuming a 32-bit popcnt instruction
* Cost to look up member(i): O(1), just using the bitset and ignoring the prefix sum

Need to take advantage of sparse population. We should only
be patching less than 10% of the entries, probably much less
than that.

* Goal: Blocks of 32 zeros should be omitted
* Difficulty: If we use an index to point to where each block should be,
  we end up requiring O(n) space.
* Difficulty: If we use a single bit to indicate the existence of a block,
  we do better on space (1 bit for every 32 elements), but we cannot quickly
  find the blocks that we are looking for.
* Solution: Introduce another prefix sum. This prefix sum tracks the number of
  blocks that were present. For a totally empty patch set, we would still need
  2 bits for every 32 elements, so 1M elements would require 8KB. This overhead
  is extremely low. Suppose that patching is entirely unneeded but the elements
  end up requiring 1B each with either offset or dictionary encoding. The 8KB is
  nearly a rounding error compared to the 1MB required to represent the data.

Complete data structure

Type parameters

* n = size of column
* p = number of patches that were actually used
* k = number of blocks that were actually populated. This is related to p.

Values

    block_exists (BE): Vec{n/1024}(Bit32)
    block_exists_prefix_sum (BEP): Vec{n/1024}(Index32[<k]), these are indices into the other arrays
    element_exists (EE): Vec{k}(Bit32), empty blocks are omitted
    element_exists_prefix_sum (EEP): Vec{k}(Index32[<p]), empty block counts are omitted
    patches: Vec{p}(U64)

Algorithms

    Note: In both of these, x refers to a base position.
    Does i exist:
      BE[i[10,22]][i[5,5]] # Note, i[5,5] selects a 5-bit unsigned integer to index into the Bit32
      AND let x = BEP[i[10,22]] in
      EE[x][i[0,5]]
    What is patch value:
      if BE[i[10,22]][i[5,5]]
        then let x = BEP[i[10,22]] in
          if EE[x][i[0,5]]
            then patches[EEP[x] + popcnt(EE[x][0, i[0,5]])]
            else 0
        else 0

The nice thing about this strategy is that it's compatible with
processing batches of 32 elements at a time. Since we have little
blocks of 32 bits, we can actually get all of the relevant patches
at the same time.
