# Language for Shell Scripts

Yesterday, I wrote a shell script that did something simple:

* Generate a random UUID
* For each newline-delimited json file in a source directory, connect to
  a corresponding unix-domain socket in a destination directory
* Push each line of json onto the stream socket with the UUID added
  to the top level at a special field

That's it. I needed to use `find` (with `mindepth`, `maxdepth`, `type`, and
`name`), `jq`, `netcat` (for sockets), and several bash tests to check that
files existed and have the correct type.

I thought about using Python, Golang, or Haskell to do this, but I ended
up using bash instead. I don't really like bash, but all of the things
I needed to do were pretty terse in bash and would have been more cumbersome
in other higher-level languages. What I realized is that, if a language
was going to contend with bash for this specific task, it would need to
have these characteristics:

* Everything described here in a standard library (no build tool for
  managing dependencies)
* JSON encoding and decoding and manipulation
* UNIX-domain sockets
* Files and directories
* Function imitating the behavior of `find`

I would need a lot the functionality from coreutils executables exposed
as functions that have similar names and options. For example, instead of
`find -mindepth 1 -maxdepth 1 -type f -name '*.json'`, I would need to
be able to do this:

    find(mindepth: 1, maxdepth: 1, type: File, name: glob '*.json')

What is important is that the function feels like using `find`. To an
extent, types get in the way. For example, we have to specify that the
value of `name` is a `glob` and not a string. But where possible, I think
that it is best to forego traditional functional programming and things
look as much like find as possible. For example, `find` accepts several
variants of `name`: `-iname`, `-lname`, `-ilname`, `-regex`. Conceptually,
these can be understood as a single argument that's a disjoint union, but
I think it would be a mistake to present it that way to the user. It needs
to look like what people are already used to. Otherwise, there's too much
friction.
