# Rethinking Second-Class Integers

## Previous Idea

On 2024-03-07, I thought through how integers might work in a system that
distinguishes between first-class and second-class types. Near the end,
I worked through an example involving an opaque `Fd` type (used as both
first-class and second-class in various places) that was ultimately
instantiated with `S32`. Making the example typecheck involved a weird
typechecking rule that changed the expected type of `read` in a module
signature. My conclusion was:

> I don't particularly like this extension to the second-class type system though.
> It is more simple to treat every type the same way. Unfortunately, it
> just doesn't actually make sense to distinguish between first-class values
> and second-class values for certain types.

## Reason to Revisit

I've recently come across situations suggest that it is useful to have both
mutable and immutable data available as either class (1st and 2nd).
Additionally, we need type constructors (like a cons list) to support
stack allocation. When a saturated type constructor is 2nd class,
the uses of its type argument in fields become 2nd class as well.
That is, we cannot allow any child objects to escape if the parent
is not supposed to escape. We lose some expressivity by doing this,
but the resulting system is simple. We need to be able to have `List S64`
on the stack, and this suggests that `S64` needs to support second-class use.

## New Approach

In a low-level language, the idea is simple:

* Types do not imply any particular class (1st or 2nd)
* A "Classed Type" is just the product of a type and a class
* Type constructors take argmuments that are Types, not Classed Types.
  The class is pushed down into all the fields when an object is
  allocated.
* Functors also accept Types, not Classed Types. All abstract types
  do not have a required class, and they can be used as either class. 
* S64 is a Type

This system works. In particular, we not longer need to have a weird
rule for the changes the type of `read` like we did on 2024-03-07.
To help with integers, we do this:

* All functions (including builtins) that take integer arguments take
  them as second-class values. (In low-level language) 
* Returned integers are first-class, which has to be the case because
  functions can only return first-class values. (In low-level language)
* Field assignment auto casts integers to first-class. (In low-level language)
* In the high-level language, enforce that integral function arguments
  are second class. Do not give the user a syntactic choice. That is,
  `Function(S32)(Bool)` actually means `Function(S32*)(Bool)`.

The fourth idea might not be possible. Why? Because we can create a function
that violates this rule like this:

    functor (X : Type) function(x : X{1})(Bool) { ... }

And then if we instantiate, we get

    myFunctor(S64) ==> function(x : S64{1})(Bool) { ... }

And now we've got a function that requires a first-class integer. Of course,
this example is proposterous. The function's argument cannot escape, so it
makes more sense for the user to mark it as second class. We might just have
to fight against this with convention and syntax instead. We can infer the
class of `S64` basically everywhere and then have some weird syntax for
having a first-class `S64` function argument.

For module functors that require functions with integral arguments, I think
we are safe. This is because:

    Function(S64{2})(Y) <: Function(S64{1})(Y)

And more generally:

    Function(X{2})(Y) <: Function(X{1})(Y)

All of our functions with S64 arguments are going to accept second-class
values, but they can be provided to functors whose argument modules include
functions accepting first-class integers.

I think I can move forward with this design.

# IO in Effects System

On 2024-04-01, I thought some about how to deal with the IO effect. Since
then (on 2024-04-09), I came up with a plan for removing the "Mutation"
effect entirely, so now I'm just down to IO as the one strange effect.
IO is unusual because:

* It may only appear once in the stack of effects, and if it appears
  at all, it is at the bottom.
* It cannot ever be interpreted.

I think that the most simple option might just be to keep it as a stack,
but the bottom of the stack is either Pure or Impure. Something like
this:

    Effect = State Type | Reader Type | Except Type | Mutation
    Effects = Pure | Impure | Cons Effect Effects

When writing parsers, we encounter the difficulty of not being able to
write "parser + IO" functions. We could borrow haskell's monad-transformer
pattern for this:

    { MkByteParser = functor(E : Effects)(Err : Type)
      { M = Reader (Array U8) + Reader Int + Except Err + E
      ; module
        { any  : Function{M}(Err)(U8) = ...
        , byte : Function{M}(Err,U8)() = ...
        , take : Function{M}(Err,Int)(Array U8) = ...
        , ...
        } 
      }
    ; MkPureByteParser = MkByteParser(Pure)
    ; MkImpureByteParser = MkByteParser(Impure)
    ; ...
    }

This isn't a great solution, but it works.

# Tags for Search

tag: secondclassint, tag: secondclass, tag:effects, tag:io
