# Read-Only Regions

I need a better plan for creating read-only regions. The only idea I have
had so far involves packing (introducing an existentially quantified
region), but I would like for that feature to be optional. It is easier
to build a compiler for a language that does not allow packing regions.
Packed regions require reference counting and some a trace operation
(to trace an entire region for references).

But packed regions were the only way that I had been able to get read-only
regions working, so now I need a different plan. Read-only regions are
important for any multi-threaded application though. When a thread
forks another thread, it must have some way to pass information to the
new thread (even in a simple fork-join scenario with no other inter-thread
communication). There are several options:

1. Only allow primitive data (without any pointers) to be shared. This
   includes at the time of forking and at the time of joining. Even in
   the simple case of an HTTP server, this does not work. This thread
   handling a request has no way to learn anything about the application
   settings.
2. Make it possible to "freeze" a region, disallowing further writes to
   the region. A frozen region could be passed to a forked thread. This is
   the solution that I am considering. In a fork-join system, the parent
   is guaranteed to outlive the child, so region lifetimes remain simple.
   Without a fork-join system, we would need to do some kind of reference
   counting. One way to implement a fork-join system is to have the fork
   operation return a `ThreadId` (similar to GHC) that is required to be
   consumed linearly. But this requires adding linear types.

How can we freeze a region? Here is a simple solution that relies on
hardware dynamic checks. We can use `mmap` to revoke permissions other
than `PROT_READ`, and then any attempt to write to the region results
in `SIGSEGV`. The drawback are that this:

1. Relies on a dynamic check (does not prevent mistakes at compile time)
2. Performs an expensive operation to do something that could be a no-op

What about linear types? That doesn't work unless you thread the write
capability through everything, which I find unacceptable.

It is not difficult to make sure that the forked thread cannot write
to the region. The difficulty is making sure that the parent loses write
access. Maybe we do not need for the parent to lose this. It's actually
fine for the parent thread to continue allocating into the region.
But we really do not want for it to keep writing to objects in the region
that the child can see. We do not have any synchronization to make sure
that the child thread does not observe an intermediate state.

A serious problem with any typed approach to this is that it results
in API bifurcation. Now there are two different meanings of
"read-only region". One of them is a promise to not write to a region.
And the other one is a guarantee that no one else will write to the
region while we are using it. Without concurrency, these two mean
the same thing. But with concurrency, suppose that we are trying
to fork a thread, and we have a read-only region available to us.
We do not know whether or not our calling context is going to
continue writing to the region once we return to it.


