# Getting GCC to Generate the Code I Want

I was able to coax GCC into generating the code that I wanted after
poking at it for a while. Here is an example:
    
    #include <stdint.h>
    #include <stddef.h>
    // A handle to a region is the capability to allocate into the region.
    // Instead of tracking a minimum against which a candidate position
    // is compared, we could do something where we test to see whether
    // or not the downward position causes a bit in the pointer to flip.
    // That approach is attractive, but it leads to complications with bigger
    // allocations (like arrays), where checking the bit is insufficient.
    // Additionally, the approach taken here makes it possible to have blocks
    // of arbitrary sizes. Commonly, 4KiB is used, but a clever runtime might
    // be able to dynamically figure out how much space was actually used by
    // a particular region most of the time. If it was less than 1KiB in 99%
    // of cases, then we could make better use of memory by providing small
    // blocks.
    struct handle {
      // Invariant: previous_downward >= minimum_downward
      // Invariant: previous_downward is 8-byte aligned
      unsigned char* previous_downward;
      unsigned char* minimum_downward;
    };
    struct person {
      int64_t age;
      int64_t height;
      int64_t status;
    };
    // Two things going on here:
    // 1. Hidden visibility stops this from using the PLT. We get an object
    //    that's ready for ordinary static linking. We do not need interposition.
    // 2. The calling convention here requires the callee to preserve every
    //    register. This function is only ever called on the uncommon path.
    //    The bad performance from preserving every register doesn't
    //    matter since it is called infrequently. The benefit that we get is
    //    that functions that allocate are able to be a little less bloated
    //    since they do not need to preserve any registers before making the
    //    function call. In this particular example, this makes no difference,
    //    because there is no register pressure in the calling context.
    __attribute__((__visibility__("hidden"))) __attribute__((no_caller_saved_registers)) unsigned char* refresh_handle(struct handle* hnd, size_t object_size);
    struct person* makeSimplePerson(struct handle* hnd) {
      struct person* bob;
      {
        unsigned char* p = hnd->previous_downward - sizeof(struct person);
        if(__builtin_expect(p >= hnd->minimum_downward, 1)) {
          // Technically, we could hoist this up above the conditional.
          // The call to refresh_handle will correct it anyway. However,
          // I don't want to do that because it would cause the struct's
          // invariant to be temporarily violated.
          hnd->previous_downward = p;
        } else {
          p = refresh_handle(hnd, sizeof(struct person));
        }
        bob = (struct person*)p;
      };
      bob->age = 0;
      bob->height = 0;
      bob->status = 0;
      return bob;
    }

We build this with:

    gcc -fno-stack-protector -masm=intel -Os -c -S playground/ex001.c

And we get this:

    makeSimplePerson:
    .LFB0:
        .cfi_startproc
        push    rsi
        .cfi_def_cfa_offset 16
        mov rax, QWORD PTR [rdi]
        sub rax, 24
        cmp rax, QWORD PTR 8[rdi]
        jb  .L2
        mov QWORD PTR [rdi], rax
        jmp .L3
    .L2:
        mov esi, 24
        call    refresh_handle
    .L3:
        xor edx, edx
        mov QWORD PTR [rax], rdx
        mov QWORD PTR 8[rax], rdx
        mov QWORD PTR 16[rax], rdx
        pop rcx
        .cfi_def_cfa_offset 8
        ret
        .cfi_endproc

If we build with `-O2` instead of `-Os`, gcc duplicates the code that
initializes the person. But with `-Os`, the initialization and the return
sequence are shared. I would prefer that the `.L2` be below the `.L3` block.
But gcc does not want to do that. Oh well. I'm pretty satisfied with how
this is working. The assembly is easy to read.

We could slightly improve this by specializing `refresh_handle` for common
known sizes (8, 16, 24, 32, etc.) This would let us eliminate the instruction
that loads 24 into `esi`.

Something I've thought about is whether or not it makes sense to support
allocating multiple objects simultaneously. GHC is able to do this, which
is pretty cool. I think we could support something like this in the language
itself so that it would be predictable. As long as all of the allocations
were for objects with statically known sizes (not arrays), we should be able
to take the sum of them and then ask for that much space from the region.

# Tricks to Minimize Register Shuffling

I should not be worrying about this kind of thing at this point, but I
noticed that if I make the pointer the first member of the struct that
backs an array, we end up with slightly smaller code. The reason is simple:
When returning a (small) struct from a function, the first member lives
in RAX and the second member in RDX. We want the pointer member to live
in RAX so that, on the slow path, the allocator returns it into the right
register for us.
