# Using Regions for Stack Allocations

This continues thoughts from 2024-02-21. Can we just get rid of the machinery
for tracking stack allocations and handle it with regions instead? Yes.
A region can be allocated on the stack if:

1. It does not escape the function in which it is created.
2. There is an upper bound on the amount of data in it. This means that
   it does not have arrays with dynamically determined lengths. It also
   means that a recursive join point cannot allocate into it.
3. It does not contain huge objects, even those with statically known length.
   For example, an array with 10 million 64-bit integers.

These properties are not captured by types, but analysis can discover
pretty easily whether or not they are satisfied, and if they are, the region
could live in a stack frame.

# Regions Containing Other Regions

Should users be allowed to create regions that contain other regions? Should
they be allowed to create regions that contain the global heap? Thoughts:

* Suppose we have a region R and the global heap G. We can talk about {R,G},
  which is the set of objects in R or on the global heap. If an object lives
  in {R,G}, then its fields may be in either R or G, and this uncertain is
  recursively pushed all the way down to the leaves. This means that a GC
  has to scan objects in {R,G}. There might be some kind of trick where
  an object can be marked as being completely in R, and then scanning could
  stop early.
* We need a "top" member T, the set of all regions plus the global heap. We
  need this so that functions with read-only arguments work correctly.

Let's try this out:

    lookup : Function(Map[Int][Int]@Any, Int)(Int)
    index  : Function[a : SimpleType, r : Region](Array@r a, Int)(regionalize r a)

Notice that, in `index`, the array's elements are part of the same region as
the array itself. If we instead make regions a part of individual types,
we have:

    index  : Function[a : Type](Array@Any a, Int)(a)

On one hand, this lets us express things that the other approach does not, like
the possibility of an in-region array whose members all live in the global
heap. (It also makes the type of `index` more simple.) On the other hand, this
causes problems for a monomorphization pass. Consider something like:

    lookup : Function(Map@Any a, Key@Any)(a)

When we call `lookup` with `a` as a heap-allocated type (e.g. `Person`)
that is allocated into a region, we end up with many specializations.
Maybe we could do this though:

    lookup[Person] : Function[r](Map@Any Person@r, Key@Any)(Person@r)

Maybe this actually works out fine. We can eliminate type variables but
preserve region variables. Do we actually need `Any`? I think we want:

    lookup[Person] : Function[r,s,t](Map@s Person@r, Key@t)(Person@r)

Of course, this is awful to look at, but it has its merits. Actually,
it's not quite right. Looking at 2023-07-23, I am reminded that the `Map`
must live in a region that includes `r`. So, we actually want:

    lookup[Person] : Function[r,s,t](Map@{s,r} Person@r, Key@t)(Person@r)

This means that a higher level language with type variables is in a
weird spot:

    lookup : Function(Map@{s,getRegion a} a, Key@t)(a)

That's terrible. We can't do that. Maybe `lookup` should not impose any
restrictions on the region of `Map`:

    lookup : Function[s,t : Region][a : Type](Map@s a, Key@t)(a)

Now, when we lower this, we get

    lookup[Person] : Function[r,s,t : Region](Map[Person@r]@s, Key@t)(Person@r)

Values of the type `Map[Person@r]@s` should keep both `r` and `s` live,
but we know that the map's spine lives solely in `s` and the map's elements
in `r`. At runtime, we need a set of region IDs somewhere so that the GC knows
what is kept live by the object. We can use the initial bits of an object
pointer to communicate what region the object itself lives in, but this
gives us no way to track where its children might live. We really need
that information to bubble up. But I guess it already has bubbled up.
The type itself, `Map[Person@r]@s`, tells us everything we need to know.

Although this is, in some vague sense, compatible with monomorphization,
it erodes much of the simplicity of monomorphization. We end up with types
that accept regions as arguments, and module functors would need to accept
regions, so module functor instantiation could happen at the term level,
which is bad.

Basically, it comes down to this:

* Regions are useful
* Monomorphization as an option for implementation is useful

And it's just not possible to get both of these. 
