# No Pure Functions

I have been struggling to come up with an effects system that incorporates
mutation. The entry on 2024-04-01 discusses this in more depth, but here's
what I wrote at that time that sums up the problem:

> I don't like how the mutability effect can get stacked. It's strange because
> it mirrors the shape of the nested callbacks that introduce the effects.

One neat resolution is to just give all functions the mutability effect.
This means that all let bindings are sequenced. It also makes it more difficult
for a user to see visually if they are calling a pure function or a function
that might mutate an argument. But if a function has no mutable arguments,
it is certainly a pure function. So this system does still help the user
reason about it in some ways.

# Getting Rid of Struct

Struct types are a wrinkle in the system I'm working on. The problem is that
second-class boxed data is already heap allocated, so structs are somewhat
redundant. What are the purposes I have in mind for structs:

1. Arrays of structs
2. Unpacking `Option` and `Result` types into arrays
3. Unpacking `Option` and `Result` types into objects

The first goal can be accomplished with a different kind of array that
accepts not general types, but constructions. This ends up as a wrinkle
in the design of arrays (now there are two array types), but needing
to unpack a struct into an array is somewhat niche, and it might be ok
to not support any kind of abstraction over these arrays. Examples of
arrays where we want this: rgb, option, result, xy coordinates.
Of these case, it is probably fine to not support abstraction for rgb
and xy coordinates. Actually, both of those would be represented as
some kind of "fixed length byte array" type, not constructions.
But option and result types are more serious.

The second goal has already been discussed in the previous paragraph.

The third goal is a serious problem, and it is difficult to resolve if
we do not have struct types. One way to work around this is to make
`Option` and `Result` builtin types.

So perhaps the solution involves:

* not introducing any special array type
* adding `Option` and `Result` as builtins (type arguments to these can be
  first class or second class)
* not having struct at all

But what about something like "array of members" in a JSON object? Now we
cannot handle this anymore. So maybe we still need the special array type
for this. We do not need to be able to embed a JSON object member in
arbitrary objects, just in an array. And this design does not give
us the flexibility to embed in arbitrary objects.

I need to think about more use cases. This is very delicately balanced,
and it might fall apart when I think through it more.

# Tags for Search

tag:st, tag:mutation, tag:mutable
