# Only Use Second-Class Values for Mutation

This continues the entry from 2024-03-07. In that entry, I worked through
an example where `withFile` accepted a callback whose argument was a
second-class file descriptor. The tricky part is that when the abstract
file descriptor type is made concrete (as `S32`), we have to make a choice
about whether or not integral types can be second class. Either:

* Integral types can be second class. The bad: Types signatures of
  functions that accept integral arguments are needlessly complicated.
  An integral argument in argument position should always be second class.
  The good: Opaque types that ultimately resolve to integral types
  (like file descriptors) can be substituted in a straightforward way.
* Integral types cannot be second class. The good: Type signatures
  involving integral types are more simple. There is no choice to be
  made. The bad: Replacing opaque types (which can be associated with
  second class values) with integral types becomes more complicated.

I'm considering a simplication that reduces expressivity but makes the
system more simple to use:

* The class distinction happens inside of types. We have a function
  `class : Type -> Class` that extracts the class from a type.
* Integral types, immutable boxed types, and booleans are only ever
  first class.
* Mutable boxed types are always second class.
* Mutable arrays are always second class.
* Immutable arrays can be first class or second class.
* Type variables (and type constructor variables if such a thing is
  allowed) are first class. They cannot be instantiated with mutable
  types.

# Two Ways to Create Boxed Data

For a long time, I have hoped that, at a low level, boxed data could
be created by (1) allocating a mutable object with uninitialized fields,
(2) writing to all the fields and (3) freezing the object. However,
tracking whether or not the fields are set is complicated. It involves
a bitmask (outside of the object itself) that the user always expects to
be eliminated by optimization. If unpacked arrays can appear in the
object, that adds some additional complication. Also, reading from
mutable objects needs to be prohibited since you do not know if the
field has been initialized.

I no longer think that this is a good approach. At a low level, the language
should permit creating immutable data directly even though the straightforward
lowering of this construct might lead to unnecessary register pressure.
An optimization pass could still decide to break a direct allocation of
an immutable object into a allocate-assign-freeze construction. 
When creating a mutable object (which may later be frozen), all fields
must be explicitly initialized. If we just choose initial values whose bit
representations are zero as the initial values, this initialization can be
very cheap. But now we gain the freedom to do things like reading fields
from the mutable object. And we do not have to deal with bitmasks for
tracking whether or not fields have been set.

# Mutable Array Element Invariance

Something that I had forgotten about is that with mutable arrays (and mutable
anything), we have to be invariant in the element type. This is not a huge
deal, but it means that we must specify the element type explicitly. It cannot
be inferred from the initial value.
