# Polymorphism Without Monomorphization

I have thought of a strategy for dealing with polymorpism. It does not
require boxing everything, but it is restricted to data types with a single
type argument. Suppose we have a type like this:

    data IntAndPair a = IntAndPair { number : Int64, first : a, second : a }
    create : a -> IntAndPair a
    create x = IntAndPair 42 x x
    projectSecond : IntAndPair a -> a
    projectSecond (IntAndPair _ _ s) = s

This would be lowered to this C struct:

    #include <stddef.h>
    #include <stdint.h>
    #include <stdlib.h>
    #include <string.h>
    struct IntAndPair {
      int64_t number;
      char others[];
    };
    // Argument is memory from the stack
    struct IntAndPair* create(size_t typeSz, char* arg) {
      struct IntAndPair* r = malloc(sizeof(struct IntAndPair) + typeSz * 2);
      r->number = 42;
      memcpy(r->others,arg,typeSz);
      memcpy((r->others) + typeSz,arg,typeSz);
      return r;
    }
    // Uses destination-passing style since we do not know the size
    // of what will be returned at compile time.
    void projectSecond(size_t typeSz, char* output, struct IntAndPair* arg) {
      memcpy(output,(arg->others) + typeSz,typeSz);
    }

This works pretty well. We have to do a bit a work to compute the address that
we care about, but it's straightforward arithmetic and is cheap. All the
polymorphic fields go at the end of the struct, and a single inline array
(appearing after the other polymorphic fields) may appear as the final
polymorphic field.

As best I can tell, this is what Sixten does. There is a bit of weirdness
with type constructors that take more than one argument. It's mostly just
that the math becomes more complicated, so projection can turn into a rather
expensive operation. But nonunary type constructors are really not that
common in practice, so maybe this is fine.

It might make more sense to just build a field lookup table when an object
is created. This would let us support multiple inline variable-length
arrays in one object. And it would become cheaper to lookup a field from
objects whose types are applied high-arity type constructors.

How much space does the runtime information about the position of fields
take? Suppose that objects should are never larger than 256 bytes. This
is a reasonable restriction, and it means that the position information
for a field can be represented with a single byte. We only need to do
this for fields that occur after the first polymorphic field.

Let's consider another option for representing data at runtime. Instead
of passing around types as arguments, we could pack information about
a type constructor's argument into the heap object itself. One disadvantage
to doing this is that call stacks would no longer include information
about which types a polymorphic function was instantiated with. But this
could be recovered by just adding the information to the call (even though
it would be unused). What information do we need to include? We need
the size, so let's redo the earlier type `IntAndPair` to use this. Let's
also include a reference count:

    struct IntAndPair {
      uint32_t rc;
      uint8_t typeArgumentSize;
      uint8_t fieldPositions[2]; // Positions for first and second
      int64_t number;
      char others[];
    };

The field positions of first and second are not actually needed. We can
compute both of these from `typeArgumentSize`. The position of `first`
is zero and the position of `second` is `typeArgumentSize`.

New question: When the `rc` for an `IntAndPair` reaches zero, what do
we do about its children? The `number` field is not a pointer, so nothing
needs to be done for it. But `first` and `second` might be pointers. Or
they might be integers. Or they might be struct-like types that include
pointers and non-pointers. For each type, we need a deallocation function:

    void deallocate_person(char* payload);
    void deallocate_house(char* payload);
    void deallocate_list(TYPE elemTy, char* payload);

For boxed types, the deallocate function just reads an 8-byte pointer
from the payload and then follows that pointer to see the actual object.
For numeric types, deallocate is a no-op. For struct-like types, the
pointer points right to the object but with screwed-up alignment.
We must start by using `memcpy` to rebuild the struct-like type on the
stack. And then we deallocate the pointers. We need a super general
deallocate as well:

    void deallocate_object(TYPE ty, char* payload) {
      if(ty == personType) {
        deallocate_person(payload);
      } else if (ty == houseType) {
        deallocate_house(payload);
      } else ...
    }

The definition of `TYPE` is a little tricky. It cannot just be an integer
because it needs to be able to represent deeply nested applications of
type constructors. It probably has to be a pointer, but objects of the
underlying struct are only ever stack allocated:

    struct saturation {
      // Argument count implied by tycon
      uint32_t tycon;
      struct saturation** args;
    }

Example of creating "list of people" type.

    struct saturation personType = {tycon = personTyCon, args = NULL}
    struct saturation* argList[1];
    argList[0] = &personType;
    struct saturation listOfPersonType = {tycon = listTyCon, args = &argList};

In the case of monomorphic types that are known at compile time,
we would actually try to just bake this into a read-only segment of
the program instead. When a polymorphic function was called inside
of another polymorphic function, we may have to build a type representation
on the stack. These should never be build on the heap though.
