# Recursive Groups with Type Variables

In a slightly higher-level language, functions should accept type variables.
What happens when we combine recursive function groups with function
polymorphism? The syntax suggested on 2024-01-06 for recursive groups was:

    { alpha = ...
    ; foo rec = ...
    ; bar rec = ...
    ; baz rec = ...
    ; beta = ...
    }

But in the higher-level language, we might want this group of functions to
be polymorpic. Here is one possible syntax:

    { alpha = ...
    ; foo rec [A] : Function[](A, S64)(Option A) = ...
    ; bar rec [A] : Function[](S64)(Option A) = ...
    ; baz rec [A] : Function[](A, S64)(A) = ...
    ; beta : Function[C](C,C,Bool)(C) = ...
    }

The members of the recursive group must agree on their type variables. When
`foo`, `bar`, or `baz` call each other in a mutually recursive fashion, they
cannot specify the type argument. This restriction makes it impossible to
write a polymorphically recursive group of functions. The lowering of the
group of functions is straightforward:

    { alpha = ...
    ; theGroup = functor(A : Type)
      { foo rec : Function(A, S64)(Option A) = ...
      , bar rec : Function(S64)(Option A) = ...
      , baz rec : Function(A, S64)(A) = ...
      }
    ; beta = ...
    }

In the higher-level language, the user-facing syntax for a function call
differs depending on whether or not a function is called by a mutually
recursive peer. Inside of the recursive group, functions are called without
providing the group's type argument. But after the group's declaration,
the type argument is provided:

    { alpha = ...
    ; foo rec [A] : Function[](A, S64)(Option A) = ...
    ; bar rec [A] : Function[](S64)(Option A) = ...
    ; baz rec [A] : Function[](A, S64)(A) = ... call bar[](a,22) ...
    ; beta : Function[C](C,C,Bool)(C) = ... call bar[S16](s16 50, 39) ...
    }

# Square Brackets for Type Arguments

I like using square brackets for type arguments in the high-level language.
Curly brackets are reserved for things with an `x = y` syntactic structure,
so I cannot use those. Square brackets are convenient because it is easy
to support omitting them. For example:

    Function(S64)(Option A)
    ===
    Function[](S64)(Option A)

And similarly:

    call bar(a,22)
    ===
    call bar[](a,22)

The certainty that a round-bracketed section is coming next makes this possible.
