# Types, Kinds, Components, Resolution

In some work I've done on a typechecker for a language with higher-order
module functors, I've discovered a few interesting requirements for a type
system and an evaluator:

* There is something that I have named a "component". Types (like `Int`)
  are components, but so are modules. Components themselves have kinds.
  Component polymorphism exists, but kind polymorphism does not exist.
* Module functors are generalized so that they accept component of any
  kind, not just modules. The user must specify the argument's kind.
* Kinds can refer to components. Module kinds include types for all of
  their members. There is no way to avoid this.
* Aliasing is an extremely import feature if there are no data types with
  nominal type equality. These aliases are implemented as component-level
  let bindings. During typechecking, we build up an context. The context
  is a map from component binders to their kinds and to their evaluations.
  The evaluations must not contain other binders. They need to be truly
  resolved. (They may include functor arguments, but these are handled
  differently.)
* Function definitions are components. However, they should not appear
  inside of a kind. The same is true of top-level values.

Slowly, the types used in this project have been accruing invariants that
I am not able to enforce. I would like to see what can be done to enforce
these. What about flattening component and kind:

    data Level = L1 | L2
    data Component : Level -> Type
      GroundType : Component L2
      Integer : Component L1
      FunctionDefinition : ... -> Component L1
      FunctionType : [Component L1] -> Component L1 -> Component L2
      ModuleDefinition : ... -> Component L1
      ModuleType : Map MemberId (Component L1) -> Component L2
      Variable : Id -> Component L1
      ...

This is a decent start. What about trying to track kinds in the type system
of the host language? Is this a useful thing to do? Possibly. Functions and
data constructors need to refer to components of kind Type. We can model
kinds a little bit (GHC cannot promote maps):

    data Kind
      = Type
      | Function -- we could track args and result, but I'm not going to here
      | Module
      | Functor Kind Kind 
    data Level = L1 Kind | L2

We are stuck when we try to describe module kinds because they need a map-like
type. Let's proceed anyway and see what happens:

    data Component : Level -> Type
      GroundType : Component L2
      Integer : Component (L1 Type)
      FunctionDefinition : ... -> Component (L1 Function)
      FunctionType : [Component (L1 Type)] -> Component (L1 Type) -> Component L2
      ModuleDefinition : ... -> Component (L1 Module)
      ModuleType : Map MemberId (Component (L1 ?)) -> Component L2
      Variable : Id -> Component (L1 ?)

This does not work at all. So let's abandon that part. What about resolution:

    data Level = L1 | L2
    data Resolution = Resolved | Unresolved
    data Component : Resolution -> Level -> Type
      GroundType : Component r L2
      Integer : Component r L1
      FunctionDefinition : ... -> Component ? L1
      FunctionType : [Component r L1] -> Component r L1 -> Component r L2
      ModuleDefinition : ... -> Component ? L1
      ModuleType : Map MemberId (Component r L2) -> Component r L2
      Variable : Id -> Component Unresolved L1
      ...

This seems like it will work. If we narrow things down with
`Component Resolved L1`, then we know that we are dealing with a
non-kind component in `Variable` is not present anywhere.
