# Building Cyclone

Today I discovered that the source code for version 0.8.2 of the Cyclone
compiler is still available on a
[university website](https://www.cs.umd.edu/projects/cyclone/old_cyclone.html).
However, it's not possible to build it in a 64-bit environment. I need to
install a 32-bit operating system so that I can try to build it.

# Learning from Cyclone

The paper Linear Regions Are All You Need discusses a high-level language
with regions and a low-level language with regions. The high-level language
uses universal quantification and an effect system (the paper describes it
as a monad) to prevent escape. The low-level language uses existential
quantification and linear types to prevent escape.

The paper Region-Based Memory Management in Cyclone, which also lists
Greg Morrisett as a coauthor, discusses the Cyclone language specifically.
Section 3 (Effects) talks about an effect system that tracks capabilities:

> Following Walker, Crary, and Morrisett, we call the set of live regions
> the capability. To allow dereferencing a pointer, the type system ensures
> that the associated region name is in the capability. Similarly, to allow
> a function call, Cyclone ensures that regions the function might access
> are all live. To this end, function types carry an eﬀect that records
> the set of regions the function might access.

This meaning of the word "capability" matches the meaning given in the
Linear Regions paper. That is, a capability refers to read-write access
to *existing* objects in a region. This does not necessarily include the
ability to allocate new objects into a region. To allocate we need the
capability and another thing called a "handle" to the region.

Let's do an example elaboration. Instead of using Cyclone's type syntax,
which has C-style pointers, I'll use a syntax I invented:

    // High-level
    reverse : Function{r,s}(Handle s, Array a @r)(Array a @s)
    // Low-level (capabilities used linearly)
    reverse : Function(Cap r, Cap s, Handle s, Array a @r)(Cap r, Cap s, Array a @s)

We have to be able to read from region `r` because that's where the source array
lives. And we have to be able to write to region `s` because that's where the
destination array will live. And we need the handle to region `s` because the
function allocates the destination array.

# Monadic Interpretation Without Linearity

I have an idea for another approach. This approach:

1. Does not need linear capabilities
2. Does not rewrite the context (like the paper A Direct Approach to
   Control-Flow Sensitive Region-Based Memory Management)
3. Uses direct style

Every expression is annotated with an input capability set and an output
capability set. It's common for these sets to be the same. However,
the `new` and `free` operations modify the capability set:

    new  : exists r. Function{set}{set + r}()        (Handle r)
    free :           Function{set}{set - r}(Handle r)()

This requires capability polymorphism. We could avoid the need for a
polymorphic base capability (named `set` in the example above) by making
`new` and `free` be special keywords instead. Let's see what this might
look like:

    e1 : Function{R1}(X)(Y)
    e2 : Function{R2}(Y)(Z)
    compose(e1,e2) : Function{R1 + R2}(X)(Z)

When we compose two functions, we just take the union of their capabilities.
But this does tell us how to deal with `new` and `free`. First, let's
handle `free`:

    e1 : Function{Q + R1}(X)(Handle R1)
    compose(e1,free[R1]) : Function{Q}(X)(Unit)

And here's `new`:

    e1 : Function{Q}(X)(Unit)
    compose(e1,new[R1]) : Function{Q+R1}(X)(Handle R1)

These are totally wrong. The composition involving `free` has a type
that suggests that we do not need the `R1` capability, but we actually
do need this capability.

Maybe functions should have types like these:

    // caps, deleted, and created are mutually exclusive
    Function{caps}{deleted}{created}(A)(B)
    f : Function{fcaps}{fdeleted}{fcreated}(X)(Y)
    g : Function{gcaps}{gdeleted}{gcreated}(Y)(Z)
    compose(f,g) : Function
      {fcaps + gcaps - fcreated - gdeleted}
      {fdeleted + (gdeleted - fcreated)}
      {gcreated + (fcreated - gdeleted)}
      (X)
      (Z)

This means that we have:

    new[r]  : Function{}{}{r}()(Handle r)
    free[r] : Function{}{r}{}(Handle r)()
    compose(new[r],free[r]) : Function{}{}{}()()
    // The type of new is actually more like this:
    // new : exists (r : Region). Function{}{}{r}()(Handle r)
    // Actually, it's even weirder. We do not have a fresh region type
    // variable in scope until we apply the function. It needs to be
    // something like this:
    // new : Function{}{}() exists (r : Region). {r}(Handle r)

This seems to work very well. Ergonomically, this is similar to the strategy
described by A Direct Approach, but it does not remove types from the context.
We have to be super careful with what names `new` is able to use for regions.
Shadowing is unsound, and even mere reuse of a region name is unsound.

I need to think about several possible gotchas:

* How does this interact with join points?
* Is there some way to freeze a region and open it back up?

The answer to the second question is yes. We need a pack and an unpack:

    // Note: pack is similar to free
    pack[r]   : Function{}{r}{}(Handle r, a@r)(Packed a)
    unpack    : exists r. Function{}{}{r}(Packed a)(Reference r, a@r)
    finish[r] : Function{}{r}{}(Reference r)()

We have to introduce `Reference`, which is almost just like a `Handle`
except that it does not give us the ability to allocate. 
The function `finish` decrements a reference counter for the packed
region and then possible reclaims the memory if the count has dropped
to zero. I see a better way:

    // Subtyping
    Handle RW r <: Handle RO r 
    // Types
    new     : exists (r : Region). Function{}{}{r}()(Handle RW r)
    unpack  : exists (r : Region). Function{}{}{r}(Packed a)(Handle RO r, a@r)
    pack[r] : Function{}{r}{}(Handle RO r, a@r)(Packed a)
    free[r] : Function{}{r}{}(Handle RO r)()

This unifies `free` and `finish`. The handle to a region now carries around
an indication of whether the it can be used to allocate. There are other ways
to do this. We could split Handle into two things. Or we could use different
names but keep the subtyping relationship. It doesn't really matter though.
