# Linear Types, Second-Class Values, and CPS

What I'm presenting today is a hodgepodge of techniques that have already been
explored in various papers. By pulling them all together, I end up with a
system that has several properties that I need. The techniques are:

* Linear types with linearity on the binder (aka linearity on the arrow)
* Second-class values (from the Gentrification paper), also on the binder
* CPS (i.e. `a ~ (forall r. (a -> r) -> r)`)

## Problem

The problem with linear types that I am trying to fix is that expressions
that allocate something to be used linearly often have types that do not
fully make sense. For example, consider:

    newBoolArray :: Int -> MutableArray Bool
    writeBoolArray :: MutableArray Bool {1} -> Int -> Bool -> MutableArray Bool

This use case of linear types is common, but it has an unsettling property:
`newBoolArray` does not play nicely with CSE and is able to create nonsensical
top-level terms. For example:

    myBools :: MutableArray Bool
    myBools = newBoolArray 100

It doesn't make sense for this to exist at the top level. The problem with
CSE is similar:

    foo(x) =
      let a = myBools 50
      let b = myBools 50
      ...

Here, `a` and `b` have identical definitions, but replacing occurrences of
one with the other is an incorrect program transformation.

## Prior Thought: CPS + Linear Types

With CPS, we can return explicitly linear/unrestricted values from functions.
For example:

    type Func m n a b = forall r. (b{n} -> r) -> a{m} -> r

But we don't actually want a bunch of closures. We can use CPS as mental
model to guide decision making, but we don't actually want the code we write
to be lowered to anything that resembles CPS. Allocation of mutable values
needs to happen in some kind of effect-like context. This will use a monadic
bind operation to extract the result from the computation. I'll use the
big arrow (=>) for this. I described a system like this on 2024-05-01.
There, we have a special `run` primitive

    run  : ((a{*} => b{*}) {1}, a{*}) -> b
    run_ : (Unit{*} => b{*}) {1} -> b
    lift : (a{m} -> b){1} -> (a{m} => b{1})

This prevents a mutable array from escaping. For example:

    newBoolArray : Int{*} => MutableArray Bool
    foo(n : Int{*}) = run (newBoolArray, n)

The body of `foo` does not typecheck because `newBoolArray` returns a linear
value, not an unrestricted one.

## New Thought: Borrowing

Borrowing is important. Many PLs with substructural type systems figure out
some way to incorporate borrowing (e.g. Rust, Austral). But the system that
I described above cannot handle borrowing. Let's try two different approaches:

    borrowBoolArray : (MutableArray Bool {1}, Array Bool {*} -> a) -> (MutableArray Bool, a)
    borrowBoolArray : (MutableArray Bool {1}, Array Bool {*} => a {*}) => (MutableArray Bool {1}, a {*})

The problem, in both cases, is that we can just pass the identity function as
the callback, and the borrowed array escapes. This is no good. Second-class
values are one possible solution to this problem:

    borrowBoolArray : (MutableArray Bool {1}{1st}, Array Bool {*}{2nd} -> a) -> (MutableArray Bool, a)
    borrowBoolArray : (MutableArray Bool {1}{c}, Array Bool {*}{2nd} => a {m}{1st}) => (MutableArray Bool {1}{c}, a{m}{1st})

Both of these appear sound. The second one is slightly more expressive
because it lets us borrow an immutable reference to a second-class array.

Using CPS with second-class values is a little strange. In the Gentrification
paper, one of the selling points of second-class values is that the cannot
be returned from functions. But with CPS, they can be returned from functions.
CPS moves the no-escape boundary to the `run` call instead. Consider a `run`
function just for CPSed computations involving second-class values, not linearly
consumed values:

    // Note: m and n are class variables
    type Func m n a b = forall r. (b{n} -> r) -> a{m} -> r
    run : Func m 1st a b -> a{m} -> b
    run f a = f identity a

With everything CPSed, we can do things that were not previously possible.
For example, as seen in the `borrowBoolArray` example, we can preserve the
class of an argument:

    id : a{c} => b{c}

There are several immidiately useful applications of this:

    index : (Array a {c}, Int{2nd}) => a {c}

If we have a first-class array, then we know that all elements are first-class
values. But if we have a second-class array, we only know that the elements
are second-class values. This is a limitation of the expressivity of this
system. We cannot say that we have a second-class array of first-class values.
But I think this limitation is acceptable. As an example of where our power
is restricted, we cannot borrow an immutable reference into a mutable array
of immutable objects and then return one of objects. But we could do this
if the array were of some primitive type like integers or booleans.
(Note: Think about this restriction more.)

But one powerful thing that we can do is borrow an immutable reference to
a mutable array of mutable objects. The entire structure is treated as
immutable inside the computation that consumes the borrowed reference.

## Additional Thoughts from 2024-06-26

It might not be necessary for the borrowed object to be "deeply second class"
in the way that I described. Consider borrowing from an array with
`borrow : MutableArray House {1}{1st} -> ?`. The two annotations both refer to
the mutable array, not the element type. It is first class (can be returned,
can be stored in data structures), and it is consumed linearly by borrowing it.
The full type of `borrow` can be:

    borrow : (MutableArray House {1}{1st}, Array House {*}{2nd} -> a) -> (MutableArray House, a)

The second-class annotation on the immutable array does not need to
restrict use of the array's elements. In fact, it cannot. If it did, then
`index` could not be well typed. If the element type were something
mutable (that required linear use), we could not borrow at all. Why?
Any strategy that makes this possible would coerce the elements to
a type that did not require linear consumption. And this would be a
problem if the elements were file descriptors. Then a file descriptor
could escape, and the functions that deal with file descriptors merely
promise to consume them linearly. So they accept as their argument both
file descriptors that are expected to be used linearly and file descriptors
that have no such restriction. We should not be able to create a file
descriptor that lacks this restriction though, but `borrow` lets us
do just that.
