# Secondary Recap: A Very High-Level Language

I ended up thinking more about a language that could target lots of other
languages and VMs, and I ended up with this set of possible targets:

* Lua
* LuaJIT
* WASM
* JavaScript
* Python
* Native x86-64

Some of these targets have builtin types for mutable unordered maps with string
keys, and it's a good idea to lower to these types if possible. Lowering to
certain targets requires some amount of monomorphization to make arrays work
correctly. For example, in JavaScript, there is a different typed array for
each combination of signedness and bit width.

A lot of these have problems that make them difficult targets. For example,
Lua has no way to describe an array of 16-bit numbers. Also, all of these
(except for lowering to native x86-64) have no way to talk about an array
of unpacked structs. It's difficult to work with 16-bit integers in Python.

The only way a language could be lowered to such at heterogeneous set of
targets is if the language incorporated all of their expressive deficiencies.
I think I'll focus on just WASM and native code.

Even WASM will be a little tricky. It's possible to support WASM+GC without
monomorphization (there is an `anyref` type), but I'd rather just carry
the type safety through.

It would be so nice to be able to punt on all the fancy stuff for tracking
array indices. Maybe I could get what I wanted by combining two features:

1. Have lots of builtins for working with arrays (a lot more than GHC)
2. Try to erase bounds checks with static analysis. There is a super common
   case that involves iterating the indices of an array (either low to high
   or high to low), and I don't think it's hard to handle this case. When
   target WASM, this part is moot anyway because this analysis is WASM's job.

What about unpacking structures into arrays and arrays into structures? The
WASM backend could just ignore this. It would work. Or it could mostly ignore
it. An array whose element type was "pair of 64-bit integers" could still
be representated as an array of 64-bit integers.

WASM has `ref` and `null ref`, so we have a natural lowering for an `Option`
type. Lowering `Result` is possible with a WASM `resulttype`. WASM's
`resulttype` is just an array of types. It's only usable at function
boundaries though, when returning data. We can use the same feature more
generally for any unpacked data.

I think that lowering variants (tagged unions) to WASM probably requires
casting when an object is scrutinized. That's fine. Unfortunately, it means
that all variants need to be represented as `anyref` most of the time.
This is fine. It's just disappointing.

If our WASM boxed data was just `anyref` in most cases, it would make
monomorphization easier since there would be a small number of
monomorphizations of each function. Any certain boundaries, we need
to convert it to the correct type, but I think these boundaries are
easy to identify.

The deficiencies of structs in WASM make me think that maybe it's best
to not bother with trying to make them first class. Or maybe we could
have a subset of structs, those that contain no more than 128 bits of
non-pointer data, be first class. And any struct with a pointer member
would be second class. This is probably fine.

WASM does not natively have any good options for closures. I'm thinking
that all functions with closure arguments should be primitives so that
they end up getting inlined. Users would not be able to define
higher-order functions.

If we want high-performance collection types, the runtime itself will have
to provide these.
