# Lowering a Monomorphic Language to C

Implementation notes from lowering a monomorphic language to C. First, simple
highlights:

* If a language is monomorphic, there is no value in separating refinements
  from types. The refinements should just be dumped into the data constructors
  with other important information about the type. For example:
  `Integer :: Signedness -> Width -> RefinedBounds -> BaseType`.
* Constructed types (algebraic data types) should not have any refinements
  other than the refinement that indicates what data constructors may be
  present. There should not be any refinements that are pushed down into
  the fields. Those live at the fields.
* Before lowering to C structs, we need to erase all multiplicity/uniqueness
  information and all refinements. I have been using a 32-bit content hash
  of each constructed type to name the type.
* I had previously tried to lower a polymorphic language to C, and the results
  were not as good. Monomorphization reduces the need for pointer casting in
  the generated code, which makes the generated code more readable. This means
  that, in theory, the C compiler itself can help catch more codegen mistakes.

# Example

This is an example of the code generated for a recursive "list of s64" cons
list type:

    struct object_9c520b7c {
      uint8_t tag;
    };
    struct object_9c520b7c_Cons {
      struct object_9c520b7c header;
      int64_t head;
      struct object_9c520b7c* tail;
    };
    struct object_9c520b7c_Nil {
      struct object_9c520b7c header;
    };

The content hash is extremely annoying and shows up all over the place, but
but the original names of the data constructors are able to help us make a
little sense of the madness. The idea is that is always safe to cast
from `struct object_9c520b7c_Cons*` or from `struct object_9c520b7c_Nil*`
to `struct object_9c520b7c*`. And it is safe to cast back as long as we
are casting back to the original type.

# Unresolved Problems

Several unresolved problems:

* I am not yet sure how to lower more deeply recursive types to C structs.
  The solution probably requires rewriting the type we traverse it. Eventually,
  we should reach a fixed point where all of the C structs that we need have
  been created.
* I want a simple answer to the question "Where do we perform casts?". And this
  question is surprisingly difficult to answer. The most simple way to get an
  easy answer is to always have local variables and struct members be of type
  `struct object_9c520b7c*`. And then we cast write before projection,
  assignment, etc. This works but it makes the generated code look awful.
  Another solution is to put everything into a single struct declaration
  with a C union inside it. This wastes space for a lot of types, and it
  does not work if there are multiple data constructors that need flexible
  array members.
* One obscure feature that I care a lot about is having multiple data
  constructors share a field. The C-union-based solution is slightly better
  at this case, but it is not great. A different approach is to just put
  every field that can possibly appear in the struct. This makes the bloat
  even worse, but it's really simple. Even this strategy has a problem
  with flexible array members of distinct types though.

It seems like the best solution for representing data constructors is to
just do the casts. I can forego projections from partially determined types
for a while.

I have run into another problem. When projecting, we need to know which
type to downcast the pointer to. How do we figure out that type? We need
to know which data constructor is assumed for the projection. It might be
necessary to decorate projection with this information before lowering
to C. But I would rather not have to do this.
