# Debian With Network Manager

If you install Debian without a graphical environment, it does not install
network manager. But during install, it does let you fetch updated versions
of packages if you install wireless credentials. After booting into the
freshly installed operating system, I was surpised that I was connected
to my wireless network. Where was the configuration saved? Everything
online suggests that it might be in `/etc/NetworkManager` or `/etc/netplan`,
but neither of these directories exist. Finally, after poking around in
`/etc` for a while, I found `/etc/network/interfaces`:

    source /etc/network/interfaces.d/*
    auto lo
    iface lo inet loopback
    allow-hotplug wlp2s0
    iface wlp2s0 inet dhcp
      wpa-ssid myssidname
      wpa-psk  superduperpassword

The `wpa_supplicant` service is configured over D-Bus. Whatever it is that
brings up the wireless interface must know how to pass the credentials over
D-Bus to get everything set up in WPA Supplicant correctly. Anyway,
it doesn't really matter since I'm going to install Network Manager now.
I just wanted to know where this information was.

# Getting GCC to use REP MOVSB

Use these flags:

    gcc -fno-stack-protector -Wall -mmemcpy-strategy=rep_byte:-1:noalign -mstringop-strategy=rep_byte -minline-all-stringops

And make sure to use `__builtin_memcpy` instead of `memcpy`. I'm not sure
which of those flags are necessary. I just kept adding stuff until it worked.

# Alias a Function With GCC

I found this example on StackOverflow:

    int myadd(int x, int y) { return x+y; }
    int coolguy (int x, int y) __attribute__((alias("myadd")));

I need to make sure this works.
