# Things I Learned About ePaper

I researched ePaper for a while yesterday. I think it would be really cool
to use ePaper as a ptty interface, especially for vim. Here are some notes:

* The name "E Ink" is actually a particular brand of ePaper. Competitors
  that I encountered include Pervasive Displays and Waveshare.
* Almost everything uses an SPI interface. Nearly all the projects that
  control ePaper from an Arduino or a Pi require SPI.
* Waveforms are important for Fast Update (also called Partial Refresh).
  According to [an Arduino forum](https://forum.arduino.cc/t/identifying-e-ink-displays-with-fast-and-partial-update-capability/982592),
  these are now commonly embedded in the device itself. For example,
  the specs for the
  [E2581PS0B1](https://www.pervasivedisplays.com/product/5-81-e-ink-displays/#ptab-2)
  describe the product as having "fast update embedded".
* Older products from Pervasive Displays let the user manually specify
  which part of the screen they wanted to refresh. They now use a different
  approach. In an
  [application note](https://www.pervasivedisplays.com/wp-content/uploads/2022/09/ApplicationNote_for_5.8inch_fast-update_EPDE2581PS0B1_20230206b.pdf)
  that I've saved a copy of in my library at pervasive-displays-e2581ps0b1.pdf,
  Fast Update mode is described like this: "The short waveform will be executed.
  COG compares the pixel data of the current image and the new image pixel by pixel,
  and then only drives the transition pixels. The mode can quickly complete
  the image update." This is probably much more simple for applications to use
  since they can just change the refresh mode and then leave all the other code
  the same.
* There is some kind of problem with e-paper at certain temperatures. A lot
  of the products have temperature sensors. I don't understand what they
  do with this information. I don't need this feature though because I'm
  only thinking about these being used in a climate controled environment.
* Most ePaper products have problems with ghosting. It's important to clear
  the screen (and leave it blank) or to perform a refresh every 24h.
* Most ePaper products cannot be left in a powered state for long periods
  of time. This doesn't mean they cannot be plugged in. It just means that
  in the software that controls them, you have to perform a sleep or suspend
  action to get the panel into a low-voltage mode. Pervasive has a
  `POWER_MODE_AUTO`, but it's just a library feature. Here's the description:
  "In automatic mode and with the `panelPower` signal defined, when a refresh
  function like `flush()` or `flushFast()` or `flushMode()` is called,
  the screen powers on, performs the refresh, then powers off." I assume
  that this adds nonnegligible latency, especially for Fast Update.
* The project PaperTTY makes it possible, in theory, to use an ePaper panel
  as a TTY device. It's not actively maintained, but it's probably worth
  trying.
* There are some "USB to SPI" products out there. I think it's probably
  best to first use something that actually has an SPI (like a Rasberry Pi).

Concluding note: I think the best way to get something working would be to
buy these:

* A Rasberry Pi with SPI and HDMI
* An ePaper panel from Pervasive Displays (since I've read the most
  about how these operate and they have a decent amount of on-device
  intelligence)

The goals, in order, would be:

* Use one of the example Python products to merely draw anything on
  the panel.
* Use the panel is as a TTY device without support for anything fancy.
  No control sequences. Just text. For fast update to work, it needs
  to clear the screen every time it reaches the bottom, and then the
  prompt must be repositioned at the top. If we scroll down every time
  we hit enter (like the vtty on desktops), we will perform a full
  refresh much more often. Even accomplishing this much will be tricky.
  The application driving the SPI interface needs its own buffer, and
  if too much output is produced too quickly, we need to just discard
  it instead of sending it to the panel.
* Try to make vim work. This requires supporting a bunch of control
  sequences.
