# Fbterm Conclusions

I've been trying out fbterm on an old laptop for a while now. Unfortunately,
it has too many bugs for me to recommend it. The next time I reprovision this
laptop, I will not use it again. I think I will try a minimal tiling desktop
instead. I really just want to use a terminal, but as a terminal emulator,
fbterm has too many bugs.

# Reusing Code

I have been thinking recently about how to reuse more of the code that I write.
One way I can do this is by writing things in DSLs that lack the expressiveness
of a general purpose language. From the DSL, it should be possible to generate
code in various languages. I've also been thinking about better general-purpose
languages as well, especially for scripting. General purpose languages that
do not task the user with memory management typically (always?) require some
kind of runtime. Is it possible to restrict a general-purpose language in
certain ways that would make it possible to statically resolve all memory
management operations? The extreme approach is to prohibit heap allocations
entirely by getting rid of all boxed types.

# Difficult Features to Implement in a Language

I've tried writing several different little languages over the last few years.
One common problem that keeps coming up is types. Here are several issues with
types.

The first is user-defined types. If users can define types at all, the
language gets bigger. We end up with a second language where users get to
define their types. This might not seem like a big deal, but it is. It
introduces a user-defined-type context everywhere that has the definitions
of every type inside it. It also means that, if we want to lower this language
to some other language, we have to think about how the systems for user-defined
types line up.

If we get rid of user-defined types, we can still have a variety of builtin
types (arrays, cons lists, option types, result types). And we can use
record types (defined structurally, not nominally) to help recover some of
what we have lost. And this works for tagged unions as well. But where
things are definitely worse is with recursive types. Recursive types can
be handled (search for equirecursive vs isorecursive for information on this)
when everything is structural, but the resulting system is ergonomically
impractical.

