# Regions, Uniqueness, Mutation, Deallocation, Stacks

## Deallocate from Region

Should it be possible to deallocate something from a region? If we allow
this, then we cannot use bump allocation for regions. The utility of
regions is that we get to perform one big free at the end instead of
performing a bunch of small free statements.

## Stacks as Regions

Every stack frame can be seen as a region. But the two have very
different implementations. Notable differences include:

* Stack frames have a lot more rules around ordering. A child
  stack frame can refer to a parent stack frame, but we cannot
  allocate into the parent frame while the child frame is still
  live. This is because the memory backing the two frames is
  contiguous.

I think it is best to not attempt to model stacks with region types.
It might be more simple to make certain fixed-size regions predictable.
For regions whose total number of allocations is bounded (and small),
we could have blocks smaller than 4096 bytes. And it is probably
possible to skip bounds checks for these. The difficulty here is
recursion. We cannot be certain in advance how many fixed-size regions
will be needed when evaluating a recursive function.

Maybe the fixed-size regions could just be built on the stack itself?
We cannot use the stack pointer to reference them, but that's ok.

## Deallocate from Global Heap

Do we need to be able to deallocate (safely via uniqueness types) from
the global heap? Regions render this feature redundant. Let's consider
several cases:

* Build a mutable map while querying it. Regions are better at doing this
  because we get to free it cheaply rather than traversing it to free it. 
* Allocate a buffer for reading from a file descriptor. We typically know
  when such a buffer will be deallocated. Regions and a `free` operator
  handle this case equally well.

# Hoare Type Theory

The paper A Direct Approach to Control-Flow Sensitive Region-Based Memory
Management uses hoare type theory to model regions. I get an inconsistent view
of Hoare Type Theory (HTT) from different sources. For example, Linear Regions
Are All You Need argues that "they [the authors of A Direct Approach] use a
Hoare-logic-based region type system and consequently have no support for
higher-order functions". However, the paper Hoare Type Theory, Polymorphism and
Separation claims that "Hoare types can be nested, combined with other types,
and abstracted, leading to a smooth integration with higher-order functions
and type polymorphism".

From my perspective, Hoare types are interesting because they model mutation
in a way that avoids a defect of linear and uniqueness type systems.

# Thoughts About A Direct Approach

I finally read enough of the paper from Henglein, Makholm, and Niss to
understand what's going on. Here are my takeaways:

* It describes a source language and a target language. I am only interested
  in the target language.
* The system in the paper has region renaming and region assignment. It
  suggests that regions are reference counted. I don't find this feature
  useful.
* The system uses a weird trick to make the objects in a region inaccessible
  after the region is released. The combination of rule 3 in "region operations"
  and the Top supertype implies that a release operation coerces all values
  that reference the region to the Top type. This works, but it is strange.
* One cool property of this trick is that a tuple can contain a dangling
  pointer. Region annotations do not have to be pushed all the way down
  into subobjects.
* Similarly, there is a bottom type, and values of this type can be coerced
  to any other type. As best I can tell, this is really just there to make
  the nil constructor for lists work nicely. I do not think it is as important.
* Like other systems built on Hoare types, this allows computations to
  update the context and reassign the type of a binder. See rule 14 in the
  paper for an example of this, although in that particular case, I don't
  see what expressiveness is gained.
* The section of the paper titled "Function Calls" provides an excellent
  explanation of a minor concession to programmer ergonomics. Up until
  that point, the reader endures an extra non-updateable context that
  clutters the typing judgements. But we finally learn that the purpose
  of these is to distinguish ways in which regions can be passed to
  functions. Universally quantified regions are what programmers usually
  think of. The callee is not at liberty to release such regions. But
  the existentially quantified ones can be released or returned.
  Notably, functions *cannot* change the types of any value binders.

The system described in this paper gives the programmer a lot of flexibility
with how they use regions. I'm not convinced that all of this flexibility
is useful. If a pass a region to a function, I'm not sure that I ever
want that function to be able to release the region. Similarly, I don't
know that I ever want a function to return objects in a freshly allocated
region. I could accomplish the same thing by just having the function accept
a region argument (universally quantified) and then allocating into it.

In this system, reassigning binder types (for values) is a local operation.
Functions cannot do this. This restriction makes sense. A function cannot
delete its arguments from the calling context because it does not know
what they are named. But a primitive could do this. Let's consider a
primitive for write an element to an array:

    write :
      (arr : Name) -> (ix : Name) -> (val : Name) ->
      {Γ, arr : MutableArray a, ix : Int, val : a}
      (MutableArray a)
      {Γ, ix : Int, val : a}
    read :
      (arr : Name) -> (ix : Name) ->
      {Γ, arr : MutableArray a, ix : Int}
      a
      {Γ, arr : MutableArray a, ix : Int}

We use these like this:

    // dst0 : MutableArray Float
    x = read(dst0,ix0)
    dst1 = write(dst0,ix1,13.7)
    dst2 = write(dst1,ix2,20.1)
    y = read(dst2,ix1)
    z = read(dst2,ix2)

This is neat because it does not make the `read` operations return the array.
This lets us enforce that a reference to an array is unique, which is helpful
when we want to freeze it (freezing is only sound when we know that something
is unique).

I think this can be extended further to implement a variant of `write` that
additionally removes the element from the context (unique array of unique
elements). But there is no way to let the user build their own data structures
that consume things like this. For example, we couldn't implement a mutable
map in library space. We would need something like this:

    insert :
      (map : Name)
      {Γ, map : MutableMap a}
      (Key -> a -> MutableMap a)
      {Γ}

But I don't think that we can let a user build this function.
