# Nominal Data Type Only At Top Level

I touched on this yesterday (2024-07-09), but I want to explore the idea
a little more. The idea is to have data types be defined nominally,
not structurally, but they can only be defined at the top level. Unlike
in SML, they cannot be defined in modules. The main change that falls
out of this is that type constructors cannot be defined as functors.
Let's consider lists:

    define List : (Type -> Type) = Cons $0 (List $0) | Nil

One thing that stands out immidiately is that it is more difficult to
prevent nonregular recursive data type from being defined. We could
try something like this instead:

    define List : (Type -> Type) = Cons $0 ^0 | Nil

Now it's no longer possible to define a nonregular type, but it becomes
difficult to define mutually recursive types. Let's switch to a different
example. Suppose I am defining a type for representing JSON, but I want
to be flexible in the container type that is used for objects:

    define Json : ((Type -> Type) -> Type)
      = Null
      | Number S64
      | String Text
      | Object $0(Json($0))

Alternatively: 

    define Json : ((Type -> Type) -> Type)
      = ... // others as before
      | Object $0(^0)

What if we do not want a map at all?

    define Json : Type
      = ...
      | Object (Array Member)
    define Member : Type
      = Member Text Json

This requires defining mutually recursive types. This is fine since neither
is an HKT. Suppose that we use this formulation:

    define Json : ((Type -> Type) -> (Type -> Type) -> Type)
      = Null
      | Number S64
      | String Text
      | Object $0(^0)
      | Array $1(^0)

Now we can swap out different containers for both objects and arrays.
For example:

    alias Json1 = Json OrderedTextMap Array
    alias Json2 = Json OrderedTextMap List

During monomorphization, we identify all unique applications of this
type constructor. Then we build monomorphized copies of the type:

    define Json1 : Type
      = Null
      | Number S64
      | String Text
      | Object OrderedTextMapJson1
      | Array Array[Json1]
    define OrderedTextMapJson1 : Type = ...

Array is builtin, so it's kind of magic. But for the ordered collection,
we end up with a specialized copy of it that uses Json1 as the element
type. We do not have to mess with a self-reference variable any more
because it's not possible to represent polymorphically recursive data types
in a monomorphic language. This ends up working nicely.

# Interaction With Module System

Modules are unable to define types. When you would want to create a fresh
type in a module, you instead have to define it at the top level. This can
cause problems. Consider ordered sets:

    define OrderedSet : (Type -> Type) = Bin ^0 ^0 | Tip $0
    SetFunctor = functor(a : Type)(Module { lt : a -> a -> Bool }) module
      empty : OrderedSet a
      insert : a -> OrderedSet a -> OrderedSet a
    IntSetAsc = SetFunctor(Int)(intLtModule)
    IntSetDesc = SetFunctor(Int)(intGtModule)

The problem is that IntSetAsc and IntSetDesc operate on the same type. It
is not parameterized by the ordering. We could try something like:

    define OrderedSet : (Module -> Type -> Type) = Bin ^0 ^0 | Tip $1

Or maybe:

    define OrderedSet : ((a : Type) -> Module { lt : a -> a -> Bool} -> Type) = Bin ^0 ^0 | Tip $0

Yikes. We cannot actually refer to the module in the definition of
OrderedSet, but the type constructor is now tagged by the module. But now
we have to decide if modules are defined structurally or nominally.
If it is structural, then the types are going to look awful in error
messages. If it is nominal, then we will have nearly clawed our way back
to what SML does.

Types should not be parameterized by modules. The dependent type signature
in the type constructor is not good.

We could just push the burden onto the user. That is, if the programmer
instantiates the module functor to create functions for working with an
ordered map, it is their responsibility to make sure that they don't
share types. I don't really like this solution though. I would really
like for something to make it clear that these the ascending int set
and descending int set have different structural invariants.

In the JSON example, this was not a problem. That's because in that
situation, the module functor didn't depend on it's module argument for
any structural invariants. It's was more of a "how can I create this data
type from small pieces" situation. And even though there are multiple
possible implementations, the resulting JSON data types are compatible
with one another.

In Haskell, this "structural invariant" condition shows up when building
collection types: hash maps, ordered maps, ordered sets. But it is uncommon
to instantiate the ordering or the hash function in multiple ways for a
single key type. This is why typeclasses are, in practice, effective for
these situations. There really is just one parameterization that is typically
desired, and newtypes are not typically needed. What I'm suggesting is
something that is less safe but more ergonomic.

A problem that arises is that if an API returns a value of type
`Map Key Foo`, the user does not know which ordering of `Key` was used.
But how could this situation arise? Surely `Key` is actually something
like U64 or U128, and if that's the case, we should be using a specialized
map type anyway.

# Tangential Thought

One thing that bother me about SML signatures (and GHC Backpack signatures)
is that you can request that the user define a data type with an exact
structure. This data type can appear in the type signatures of some of
the functions in the signature. I've always felt like it makes more sense
to lift that data type outside of the signature, probably converting it
to a type constructor, so that the user does not have to redefine the
same type over and over. Although the advantage of what SML does is
that the type doesn't end up being a type constructor. Everywhere that
it gets used, you don't have to tack on the parameters over and over.

Maybe it's possible to get something similar without expressing type
equality so directly. If we have pattern synonyms (which are really
just functions with nice syntax), we can do this:

    // Without patterns
    JsonRequirements : Type -> Module = (json : Type) => Module
      isNull : json -> Option Unit
      mkNull : Unit -> json
      isNumber : json -> Option S64
      mkNumber : S64 -> json
    // With patterns
    JsonRequirements : Type -> Module = (json : Type) => Module
      Null : Pattern json Unit
      Number : Pattern json S64

Now the user redefines the json type over and over again. And there
is a problem with exhaustivity checking. But now the `Json1` and
`Json2` types from the very beginning of this entries could actually
be types, not aliases. We might want that. And for ordered maps,
we get a partial solution to our problem. The map type itself could
be an argument to the functor. This means that the user has to
redefine the map type every time they want a new copy of it.
Additional thoughts on this approach:

* It's possible to improve this with syntactic sugar for duplicating data type
  declarations. We could have something like a type constructor but that
  creates fresh types instead.
* This requires some amount of discipline when building copies of the same
  type. It needs to be done somewhere sufficiently high in the dependency
  chain so that we do not end up in a situation where two units of code
  create two identical maps that an incompatible with one another.
* If namespace exports can make data type opaque, then we can seal the
  map types and preserve their invariants.
