# A Stack of Regions 

I found a problem with the strategy that I proposed on 2024-10-05. There
is no way to upcast values from a parent region to a child region. The
low-level system from Linear Regions Are All You Need allows the user
to do this. The parent capability is paired together with the fresh
child capability. This means that it can be recovered when needed to
perform some action that requires the parent capability.

The problem I have is that I have made the regions completly unordered.
There is no stack of regions. So one solution is to turn them back into
a stack. This means that everything has to get freed in the order that
it is allocated. But doing this means that there is no hope of being
able to pack regions, which is a door I would like to leave open.
Here are some other ideas:

    // Create region with no parent, like before 
    // Region Z is the "bottom" region, the region with compile-time
    // objects.
    new  : Function()(exists r. Handle Z r) {+r}
    free : Function(Handle Z r)() {-r}
    newChild  : Function(Handle Z p)(exists c. Handle p c) {+c,-p}
    freeChild : Function(Handle p c)() {-c,+p}
    // Upcasting is a no-op
    upcast : Handle p c -> a@p -> a@c

This makes a handle serve two purposes. It's a reference to the region
(for allocating data and freeing the region), and it tells you what
parent region is. I think we can split these responsibilities into
different types:

    new       : Function()(exists r. Handle r, Root r) {+r}
    newChild  : Function()(exists r. Handle r, Parent p r) {+r,-p}
    free      : Function(Handle r, Root r)() {-r}
    freeChild : Function(Handle r, Parent p r)() {-r,+p}
    upcast    : Parent p c -> a@p -> a@c

This is better. The types `Root` and `Parent` are both proofs about where
a region belongs in the region forest. Crucially, it is not possible to
free a region without having this information. Both of these types have
no runtime representation. If region packing is ever supported, it will
only be possible to pack regions that are roots in the forest.

This system is cumbersome to use when we need to work with both a parent
region and at the same time. For example, we would normally allocate an
array like this:

    newArray : {r : Region, a : Type}(Handle r, n : Nat, a) -> (Array n a)@r {r}

But if we want to allocate an array into a parent region:

    newArray : {r : Region, p : Region, a : Type}(Handle p, Parent p r, n : Nat, a) -> (Array n a)@p {r}

But having two different functions is unacceptable. What we need is a
function-application modifier instead:

    f : A -> B {R}
    apply(f, x) : B {R}
    proof : Parent Q R
    applyLifted(f, x, proof) : B {Q}

One other wrinkle that could make this even slightly worse. The parent proof
currently serves at least three purposes:

1. Coercions of existing data
2. Being able to allocate into the parent region when the effect includes
   the child.
3. Recovering the capability when the child is freed

For 1 and 2, it makes since to exploit the transitivity of parenthood. If
X is a parent of Y and Y is a parent of Z, then X can be treated as a parent
of Z. But only for 1 and 2. If we allowed this to be done more generally (for 3),
it would become possible to free a child region and skip freeing its parent,
dumping the grandparent region back into the set of capability effects.
Leaking regions is bad, so we cannot allow that.

So we might want to distinguish between a direct parent and an ancestor.
This means more types, but it also means more expressiveness.

Something I like about this approach is that it does not make the type
signatures of anything that does not use it more complicated. The complexity
is only present in places where we need to capture the relationship between
two regions.

As a concluding thought, I'm not sure how often related regions actually
show up in practice. One common situation is deserialization that requires
building a syntax tree which may reference the original bytes as strings.
(This happens in both JSON, protobuf, and HTTP.) But I don't know where
else I expect this need to show up. There aren't any popular languages
with regions, so it's hard to know.

Other thought: A child region could have multiple parent regions. I don't
see why this wouldn't work. It would just require having the `Parent` type
take a set of regions as its first argument. And then everything else
would get a little more complicated.

The multi-parent-region idea is a possible solution to something that has
bothered me for a long time. If a function accepts four arguments, and it
only reads from them and does not alias them in its result, then the arguments
could all live in different regions. At least, that's the maximally flexible
type signature for the function. But people (like me) don't want to write out
add a bunch of type variables to the type signature. I've tried to solve this
before with a "top region", but it's not sound because it makes it possible
to keep using an object after its region gets deallocated. With multi-parent
regions, this could instead be solved by requiring all of the arguments
to be in the same region. Then, at the call site, the programmer could
create a fresh region that is a child of all in-scope regions, coerce all
the arguments to be in this region, and then call the function. Actually
calling a function this way is cumbersome, but it has the advantage of not
polluting the type signature of the callee. I believe it is possible to
introduce some kind of shorthand that makes this convenient to use.
