# Beam VM as Compiler Target

I researched erlang and beam a litte bit. Here's what I've learned.
Start with this module as an example (`hello.erl`):

    -module(hello).
    -export([start/0]).
    start() -> io:fwrite("hello, world\n").

Compile and run:

    > erlc hello.erl
    > erl -noshell -pa . -s init stop -s hello
    hello, world

Cool. Compilation produces a `hello.beam` file. This file cannot be read by
a human. To get that, we have to use `erlc -S`. But lets try something more
interesting that will teach us more about how the Beam works:

    -module(person).
    -export([tallPersonNamedBob/1]).
    -record(person, {name, age, height}).
    tallPersonNamedBob(Age) ->
        #person{name="bob", age=Age, height=100}.

Becomes:

    {function, tallPersonNamedBob, 1, 2}.
      {label,1}.
        {line,[{location,"person.erl",6}]}.
        {func_info,{atom,person},{atom,tallPersonNamedBob},1}.
      {label,2}.
        {test_heap,5,1}.
        {put_tuple2,{x,0},
                    {list,[{atom,person},{literal,"bob"},{x,0},{integer,100}]}}.
        return.

I found a description of the opcodes at
[beam-internals](https://github.com/xandkar/beam-internals/blob/master/instruction_set.md)
and I've archived this in my library. There's an even better source at
[genop.tab](https://github.com/erlang/otp/blob/master/lib/compiler/src/genop.tab).
I'll try to decipher this bit by bit:

* `test_heap`: Ensures that 5 words (64-bit words) are available on the heap.
  Beam uses a semispace collector, which is the only way that this operation
  could make sense. Why do we need 5 words? One for each field of person, which
  makes 3. One to tag the structure as a person (I think), which is what
  `{atom,person}` is more. And the last one identifies the structure as a list.
* `put_tuple2`: Copies the second argument (five words) to the heap pointer
  and then copies the heap pointer to `{x,0}`, overwriting the register where
  `age` had been stored.
* `return`: The result must be placed in `{x,0}` before returning, and it's
  there, so that's good.

Other things I've found:

* Beam has persistent associative maps (`put_map_assoc`, `get_map_elements`)
* Beam has byte arrays (`is_binary`, `bs_put_utf8`). The high-level erlang
  has the same problem that Haskell has where there are too many types for
  dealing with strings. The `string` type is a cons list. There is a `binary`
  and a sub binary type for slices. And there is an `IOData` type that is
  chunked `binary` (like lazy bytestrings in GHC Haskell). 
* Beam has cons lists (`is_list`, `get_hd`, `get_tl`).
* Beam does not have arrays.

Remarkably, there are no arrays in beam. The arrays provided by erlang are
implemented in erlang. They are persistent arrays.

I'm starting to think that maybe beam is not a great target. The lack of
arrays of boxed values is frustrating. Beam is not documented well, and it's
primops suggest that it was designed with erlang's standard library in mind.
I don't think that it is really intended to be used in the way that I hoped
it was.

# Built-In Map Types

If you cannot unpack arrays into structs, it is difficult to design an
efficient implementation of several different types of containers. I had
the thought that maybe it makes more sense to just build important container
types into the runtime.

# WASM Workaround

On 2024-12-06, I noticed that WASM+GC has no way to build an array of structs.
This provides pressure to just accept that structs should not exist. Maybe it
makes the most sense to say that unpacking structs should an optimization
outside of the programmer's hands. That is, there is no guarantee. It is
only desirable to do this when the struct has a small number of fields, and
WASM can still hit some of these cases:

* A pair type where the key and value are both strings. Just allocate an
  array of string where the length is twice the number of elements.
* RGB. Same thing. All the struct members have the same type.
* Arrays. That is, the elements are themselves arrays, often arrays of
  bytes. We could store triples of (array, i31, i31), upcasting them
  all to `any`. I don't love this. You pay for it by downcasting, but
  it's fine.

Leaving this to the implementation (or optimizer) is disappointing, but it
opens up more possible targets.

# WASM and Polymorphism

Some amount of monomorphization is necessary for WASM, but I think it's
easy to reason about where this needs to happen. WASM has types for
arrays, integers (several widths), and user-defined boxed types. In
the source language, any type we have a type variable, this should be
represented as `any` in WASM. Any time we call a polymorphic function,
we might need to cast the arguments and the result.

# WASM Example

I wrote some WASM code:

    (module
      (func $add (export "add") (param $x i32) (param $y i32) (result i32) ;; export in signature
        local.get $x
        local.get $y
        i32.add
      )
      (func (export "main") (result i32)
        i32.const 5
        i32.const 13
        call $add
      )
    )

And you can run it with:

    wasmtime run --invoke main hello.wasm

And you get 18 like you would think.
