# Reasonable Compromise for Lowered C Struct Definitions

On 2024-06-04, I could not figure out a good way to lower ADTs to C structs.
Since then, I have learned about anonymous unions and anonymous structs.
Here is an example of a type for B Tree nodes. It is a tagged union with
leaf nodes and branch nodes, and both types of nodes use the same `keys`
array:

    struct btree {
      uint8_t tag;
      int64_t keys[2];
      union {
        // Fields unique to a branch node
        struct {struct btree* children[3];};
        // Fields unique to a leaf node
        struct {uint64_t elements[2];};
      };
    };

If we have a value `node` of type `struct btree*`, we can perform any of these
accesses:

* `node->keys`
* `node->children`
* `node->elements`

Of course, care must be taken to avoid accessing `children` or `elements`
when an union was not appropriately initialized. We can go slightly further
and write:

    struct btree {
      uint8_t tag;
      union {
        struct {int64_t keys[2]; struct btree* children[3];};
        struct {int64_t nope[2]; uint64_t elements[3];};
      };
    };

And C's common initial sequence rule means that we should be able to use
`keys` in place of `nope`. It would be better if we did not have to give
it a name like this, but C does not allow us to define an unnamed field.
Why would we want to do this? Suppose we had a third data constructor that
did not have `keys`. Then we could avoid reserving space for something
unneeded by it.

Disadvantages of this approach:

* Wastes space. Every allocation is as large as the largest possible
  data constructor belonging to the type.
* Requires some amount of analysis to put the common fields at the
  beginning of the anonymous structs.

Advantages of this approach:

* Does not require casting to perform field accesses
* Does not require knowing anything of the object type. The field name
  is just lowered directly to C.
* It might be possible to get this to not waste space. Technically,
  underallocating for a struct is UB, but I'm skeptical that underallocating
  would actually cause problems if we never touched any of the fields that
  were past the end. 
