# Another Golang Experience

I was working on something in golang today, and I noticed some good things
and some bad things. Good things:

* JSON marshalling is straightforward when you are on the happy path.
  For example, the annotations that can be added in a struct definition
  are great, and `omitempty` has an intuitive behavior that I find useful.
* Golang's standard library had everything that I needed. This included:
  json marshalling function, a string builder, opening a file with
  truncate behavior. I did not have to pull in any dependencies.

Bad things:

* Golang doesn't convert the json to a syntax tree, so custom unmarshallers
  take a byte array as an argument, which feels strange.
* When the default unmarshaller for a type is not what is desired,
  type definitions (not type aliases) have to be used to override that
  default behavior. This is eerily reminiscent of using Haskell's newtypes
  to change which typeclass instance is selected.

# Staged Injections with Decent Compiler Support

One thing I found frustrating (and this happens in nearly every language)
is that I had an enum-style data type that I had to write encode and decode
functions for. Imagine this example (in GHC Haskell):

    data Color = Red | Green | Blue
    encodeColor :: Color -> Text
    encodeColor = \case
      Red -> "red"
      Green -> "green"
      Blue -> "blue"
    decodeColor :: Text -> Maybe Color
    decodeColor = \case
      "red" -> Just Red
      "green" -> Just Green
      "blue" -> Just Blue
      _ -> Nothing

There is a redundancy to this that I dislike. It's easy to modify one of these
and forget to update the other one. Someone might suggest deriving a `Read`
and `Show` instance and doing some kind of case conversion on the head of the
strings, but that falls apart once we have a color with a space in the name.
What we have is an injection, but mosty programming languages do not have
a good way to communicate that. We want to say something like this:

    data Color = Red | Green | Blue
    colorEncoding :: Injection Color Text
    colorEncoding = injection:
      Red <-> "red"
      Green <-> "green"
      Blue <-> "blue"
    encodeColor :: Color -> Text
    encodeColor = forward(colorEncoding)
    decodeColor :: Text -> Maybe Color
    decodeColor = backward(colorEncoding)

This is a kind of metaprogramming since the injection is staged. The injection
is a metaprogram that is extremely restricted. We must have some notion of
equality for both the domain and the codomain. At compile time, the compiler
must check that all elements in the codomain are distinct from one another.
It must do this for the domain as well (and do exhaustivity checking), but
this is already a normal thing for compilers to do in functional programming
languages.

There are tons of restrictions on this. It doesn't really work with type
variables. Recursion is hard to get working correctly. An injection cannot
refer to other non-meta-levels functions but probably can refer to other
injections:

    data FlavorOrColor = SomeFlavor Flavor | SomeColor Color
    -- Probably not a good syntax
    flavorOrColorEncoding :: Injection FlavorOrColor Text
    flavorOrColorEncoding = injection:
      Flavor f <-> flavorEncoding f
      Color c <-> colorEncoding c

And in theory, that might be able to work, but it should fail if
a flavor and a color shared an encoding. That's kind of strange
because it means that you cannot tell if this should typecheck or
not without looking at the definitions of `flavorEncoding` and
`colorEncoding`. Maybe the type of an injection should have to
tell you all of the elements in the codomain.

# Other High-Level Abstractions That I Want

Here are some other high-level abstractions that I think are useful.
These are not things that can be implemented as a library in most programming
languages. They require special type systems and special syntax. And they are
staged and lowered to a normal program. I believe that the "Bazarre" model
of having these features be supplied by third parties does not work well.
These need to have tight integration with the compiler and the build system.
This results in error messages instead of typechecking errors that reference
generated code that the user did not write. It also means that the user does
not need to layer `make` or some other build tool on top of the normal build
tool to rebuild metaprograms when they change. Here's the list:

* Regular expressions with simple capture groups. It should be possible
  to use this as pattern matches on strings.
* Parser generators for LL(1) grammars. I wrote a justification for this
  on 2024-06-16.
* Bidirectional serialization
* Metalanguage for dealing with JSON
* Code generator for protobuf schema files
* Code generator for flatbuffers schema files
* Code generator for jsonschema. I'm not sure if jsonschema is widely
  used though. I've never actually encountered an API that uses jsonschema
  to document itself.
* Some kind of understanding of SQL and of SQL's type system. This is a
  thorny issue for several reasons. Every database vendor extends SQL
  differently. Still, this would be extremely useful.
