# Type System Avoiding Boxing When Possible 

Here's my latest attempt:

    Bounded : Kind
    Unbounded : Kind
    S64 : Bounded // S64 is a type whose size is known and small
    Rgb : Bounded // Rgb is a user-defined struct
    Option : forall (k : Kind). k -> Unbounded // An Option may be arbitrarily large
    Option @Bounded S64 : Unbounded
    Option @Unbounded (Option @Bounded S64) : Unbounded
    List : Bounded -> Bounded // Lists are boxed
    (=>) : [exists (k : Kind). (k, Mult)] -> [exists (k : Kind). (k, Mult)] -> Function

A function can accept both bounded and unbounded arguments. It can return
multiple values. And these values can be of any size. We can only quantify
over bounded types. Here are examples of function type signatures:

    // Any quantified variables are bounded, not unbounded
    fromOption : forall a. (a, Option a) => (a)

# Adding Regions Back

Now with regions:

    // Note: I've renamed Bounded to Type and Unbounded to UnboundedType 
    Type : Kind
    UnboundedType : Kind
    Boxed : X
    Region : X
    TypeAt : Boxed -> Region -> Type
    // Capabilities have zero size and always have consumption tracked
    Capability : Region -> Type
    Handle : Region -> Type
    S64 : Type
    Person : Boxed
    TypeAt Person r : Type
    Option : forall (k : Kind). k -> UnboundedType

Everything still works fine. Things to notice:

* Unbounded types are never associated with a region.
* This is not indicated in the type system description, but an unbounded
  type is allowed to be used as a field in a boxed data type. It can even
  reference any (bounded) type variables if the boxed data type accepts
  type arguments.
* A capability is considered a bounded type, but the linear type system
  prevents it from ever being used as a field of a data type. Handles
  can be stored in data types, but I'm not sure that it's a good idea
  to do that.

I need better names for these things. I've wanted to refer to unbounded types
as structs. However, there are struct types in this language, but they are
bounded (e.g. an RGB type). Maybe something like `Type+` or a symbol.
Also, it would be nice to have a subtyping relationship. Maybe like this:

    * <: #
    S64 : *
    Option : # -> #
    Option S64 : #
    Option (Option S64) : #

# Specializing Sizes

It might be useful, in performance-critical situations, to have
size-specialized variants of some functions. Before I describe how this
might be done, I want to stress that this kind of specialization is seldom
advantageous. Remember, values with polymorphic types cannot be examined
in any way. They can only be shuffled around. Additionally, array-range
copies are always lowered to `memcpy`, so specialization is unlikely to
improve them. It's only single-element accesses that are improved.
Opportunity presents itself in these situations:

* We are examining a polymorphic array element by element. This might happen
  during a permutation.
* We reverse a cons list.

There are actually so few situations that I can think of that I am not
inclined to pursue this idea further. Permutation can just be a primop.

# Refinements

Refinements are a perpetual thorn in my side. There are three main uses I had
for them:

* Bounding integers
* Data constructor refinement (after scrutinee)
* Restricting ascii characters to subsets

The first two of these can be handled other ways. We can bound integers
with a `Finite` type, and data constructors can just be handled like they
are in GHC Haskell. So I'm down to just subsets of ascii characters,
only relevant for 8-bit words. These subset refinements are destroyed
by nearly every operation on 8-bit words. For example, logical conjunction
and disjunction both destroy them. The way these get used in practice is
that there is a validation step that confirms that an 8-bit word is part
of a subset. This validation step might use inequality operations and
equality operations. Then we end up with a refined word. We typically
have strings built of these words, and as we concatenate strings, we end up
with the union of all the refinements as our final refinement. This can
be very handy. It's nice to know if it's possible for a string to contain
a newline, a tab, an unprintable character, etc.

Character set refinements do not impact memory safety like the other
two types of refinements do. They could be implemented in a way where
we rely on them for memory safety, but they don't have to be implemented
that way. So they might not need to be part of the low-level language at all.
They could be introduced as part of the high-level language instead, and
we would make unchecked assumptions about lots of results from low-level
primitives. But then we could get the low-level language off the ground
faster.

But maybe the cost of carrying this all the way through is not as high
as I imagine it is. Let's try adding refinements:

    * <: #
    Option : # -> #
    U8Ref  : X
    S64    : *
    U8     : U8Ref -> *
    U8 [0..126] : *
    forall (p : U8Ref) (q : U8Ref). (p <: q) ==> (U8 p <: U8 q)

And some functions:

    concatenate             : forall (a : Type). (Array a         , Array a         ) => Array a
    concatenate @U8[0..100] :                    (Array U8[0..100], Array U8[0..100]) => Array U8[0..100]

# Tools I Learned About Today

Some things I discovered:

* Hare programming language. This is kind of neat, but it has a very narrow
  scope. It does not have polymorphism. Memory is managed manually (i.e. you
  have to call `free` on things).
* QBE, a lightweight alternative to LLVM. It shares LLVMs backwards-feeling
  phi node argument syntax. It does not have a way to detect arithmetic
  overflow.
* Cranelift is more mature now. It has a more natural syntax for arguments
  to blocks (not the weird phi-node thing). It has an i128 type. It supports
  overflow checks for arithmetic. 

I should reconsider LLVM as a compilation target. It might be better than I
remember it being. Or maybe my own preferences have shifted enough that it's
now a reasonable target.
