# Installing Debian on HP EliteDesk 705 G3

I recently spent several hours installing Debian on an HP EliteDesk (an old
mini PC I found on eBay). Initially, what happened was that the first boot
into the freshly install Debian worked fine, and then every attempt after
that was met with "BootDevice Not Found". Finally, I found the answer at
https://unix.stackexchange.com/questions/696080/strange-nvme-bootdevice-not-found-error-on-hp-elitedesk-800-g2-mini
even though this question deals with a different EliteDesk and an NVMe drive
(my hard drive is an SSD). Here's my summary of everything:

* Use UEFI. Disable legacy booting, and disable secure boot.
* The boot loader needs to be installed with `grub-install --removable`, which
  the debian installer does not do by default. The word "removable" does not
  do what it sounds like. It causes the EFI executable to be installed
  to the "fallback" path (`EFI/boot/bootx64.efi`).
* To prevent failures from happening after system updates, it is necessary to
  run `echo "grub-efi-amd64 grub2/force_efi_extra_removable boolean true" | sudo debconf-set-selections`
  as well.

# Region Types Again

I keep iterating on this idea. Here is a variant with these properties:

* Uses natural numbers for levels
* Does not require existenial types
* Is not is a fully "direct style" but is pretty close

Here is the key primitive:

    // Specialized to return something at the current level
    with0 : (Handle (n+1) ->{n+1} a@n) ->{n} a@n
    // More general form, set m=0 to recover with0
    with  : (Handle (n+m+1) ->{n+m+1} a@n) ->{n+m} a@n

The general form indicates that we return something arbitrarily far up the
region stack. Setting m=0 recovers `with0`, but setting n=0 gives us something
that returns something in region zero, the region of constant objects known at
compile time. Here is an example:

    makeMemberMap : forall n m. (Handle n, Array@(n+m) Member@(n+m)) ->{n+m} MemberMap@n
    // Note: Result is a stack-allocated type and has no region annotation
    parseThing : forall n. (Handle n, Array@n U8) ->{n} (Result Thing@n)
    parseThing{n}(h0,input0):
      // Assume the header is a primitive type that does not need allocations
      // and consequently does not take a handle argument
      r0 <- readHeader{n}(input0)
      case r0:
        Failure msg: return (Failure msg)
        Success (hdr, input1):
          r2 = with0(h1):
            r1 = readMembers{n+1}(h1,input1)
            case r1:
              Failure msg: return (Failure msg)
              Success (members, input1):
                memberMap = makeMemberMap{n,1}(h1,members)
                return (Success memberMap, input1)
          case r2:
            Failure msg: return (Failure msg)
            Success (memberMap, input2):
              ... // keep going, we now have the header and the members,
              ... // and are operating in region n (not n+1)

I don't think this is necessarily bad, but I'll highlight the bad parts of it.
The most noticeable problem is a result of the system not being fully
direct style. In our call to `with0`, we have to wrap the results in `Success`
or `Failure`, and then we immidiately scrutinize this result. When the argument
program given to `with0` completes, the temporary region get deallocated.
The low-level language from Linear Regions Are All You Need works more
intuitively. In that system, it is possible to put the region deallocation
statements directly into the `Failure` and `Success` arms of the scrutiny
of `r1`. This avoids the undesirable construction of `r2`.

The other weird thing is the type of `makeMemberMap`. We are operating
in a context that is nearer to the top of the region stack, but we want
to allocate into a region closer to the bottom. The type I gave is sound,
but there might be something more simple. First, consider that anything
in scope can actually be read from (since `with` does not permit dangling
pointers to escape). That is:

    indexArray : forall m n. (Array@m a, S64) ->{n} a

So we might be able to write:

    makeMemberMap : forall n m p q. (Handle n, Array@p Member@q) ->{n+m} MemberMap@n

This cannot be considered an improvment. It adds more type variables.
And p and q types that can be chosen must satisfy `p <= n+m` and `q <= n+m`,
so we should leave it alone. In fact, even with indexing into arrays, we
should prefer:

    indexArray : forall n. (Array@n a, S64) ->{n} a

This is because we can freely upcast immutable values to have types that
make them look closer to the top of the stack:

    Foo@s <: Foo@(s+r)

Let's revisit an earlier claim. I said that `with` does not let dangling
pointers escape, but I'm not sure that that's true. Consider a type like
this:

    Array@n Foo@(n+1)

We don't even really want something like this to exist, but the system
that I have described does not prevent it. Maybe it could though. Let's
try:

    replicate : forall n m a. (Handle (n+m), S64, a@n) ->{n+m} Array@(n+m) a@n

This works. It requires that all types, including primitive types,
have a region associated with them. If we set n=0, we observe a variant
of replicate that can be used on compile-time constants and primitive
types. If we set m=0, we observer a variant of replicate that creates
an array in the same region as its elements. This formulation of
`replicate` makes it impossible to create an array that points to
elements in a region nearer to the top of the stack because `n+m >= n`.
So for some value of type `Array@x a@y`, we know that `y <= x`.

Let's look at other functions:

    allocateFoo : (Handle n) ->{n+m} Foo@n
    upcastArray : Array@n a@p -> Array@(n+m) a@p

When upcasting, we can increase the level associated with the type constructor
(the outermost type) but not the levels associated with any argument types.
That's kind of weird.

If we didn't have to worry about inner levels being smaller than outer levels,
we could abstract types paired with levels and have this type for replication
instead:

    replicate : forall n a. (Handle n, S64, a) ->{n} Array@n a

This is superior. I need to figure out how to make this work. It's something
along the lines of this: We need to allow values of type `Array@n Foo@(n+1)`
to exist (even though they are very nearly nonsense), but we need to prevent
them from being returned by `with`.

Another idea is to make the levels on the inside mean the opposite. That is,
the level attached to the element type is the number of levels down from the
container's level. That's just too strange. Let's go back to the previous idea.

Let's distinguish between a a backing level and a perceived level. The backing
level is the number of the region that the value is physically stored in.
The perceived level cannot be lower that the backing level. With this in mind,
we can say:

    Array@n Foo@n <: Array@n     Foo@(n+1) // strange right-hand type
    Array@n Foo@n <: Array@(n+1) Foo@n
    Array@n Foo@n <: Array@(n+1) Foo@(n+1)

What's important is that the backing level of the elements never exceeds
the backing level of the container. That's controled by `replicate`:

    replicate : forall n m a. (Handle (n+m), S64, a@n) ->{n+m} Array@(n+m) a@n

Here, the backing level and the perceived level of the output array are
both n+m. The element's perceived level is n, and we don't know exactly
what it's backing level is, but it must be less than or equal to n.
What about array concatenation:

    // Note: I've realized that I could actually get rid of m here because
    // the arrays in perceived region n can be upcast to perceived region n+m
    append : forall n m p a. (Handle (n+m), Array@n a@p, Array@n a@p) ->{n+m} Array@(n+m) a@p

We create an array at the top of the stack, copying from two source arrays
that are nearer the bottom of the stack. The element type's region appears
unrelated in this type signature, but we know that

    backing(element) <= backing(array) <= n <= n+m

Let's think about `replicate` again. I would like to be able to write this
instead:

    replicate : forall n p a. (Handle n, S64, element : a@p) ->{n} (array : Array@n a@p)

But do we know that `backing(element) <= backing(array)`? I think we do.
First, we know that `backing(array) = n`. In a context `n`, it is possible
for values backed by region `n-1` or `n-2` to exist, but not values backed
by region `n+1`. See what happens when we try to make an element escape:

    // starting at level m
    // suppose that (h0 : Handle m) is in scope
    badArray = with0(h1):
      myFoo = allocateFoo{m+1}(h1)
      array = replicate{m}(h0,100,myFoo)
      return array

This does not typecheck because we cannot sequence expressions with different
region annotations (`m != m+1`). But this means that we cannot allocate into
`m` at all inside the `with0` block. Or does it? Remember from earlier that
I wanted something like this:

    makeMemberMap : forall n m. (Handle n, Array@(n+m) Member@(n+m)) ->{n+m} MemberMap@n

Which allocates into a region that is not at the top of the stack. What
would `replicate` look like if it had the power to allocate into a lower
region?

    replicate : forall n m a. (Handle n, S64, a@?) ->{n+m} Array@(n+m) a@?

The question mark is there because it's not sound to use `p` like we did
before. There might be value that live in regions above `n`. So we need:

    replicate : forall n m q a. (Handle (n+q), S64, a@q) ->{n+q+m} Array@(n+q) a@q

Alternatively:

    replicate : forall (x <= y <= z) a. (Handle y, S64, a@x) ->{z} Array@y a@x

This is not working well. Even simple functions like `replicate` require
way too many type variables. If we end up enforcing the elements are in
lower regions, we can probably introduce a way to lift expressions:

    lift : {m}{n} (a ->{n} b) => (a ->{n+m} b)

And then simplify `replicate`:

    replicate : forall n q a. (Handle n+q, S64, a@q) ->{n+q} Array@(n+q) a@q

Then we can recover the earlier `replicate` with:

    forall n m q a. lift{m}{n}(replicate{n}{q}{a})

What about `append`:

    append : forall n p a. (Handle n, Array@n a@p, Array@n a@p) ->{n} Array@n a@p
    // or possibly
    append : forall n p a. (Handle (n+p), Array@(n+p) a@p, Array@(n+p) a@p) ->{n+p} Array@(n+p) a@p

The first one is more simple, but it exploits evidence that the argument
arrays witness:  `p <= n`. The second form is more consistent with the
type of `replicate`. Let's consider a few other array primitives:

    write   : (Array@(n+p) a@p {1}, S64, a@p) ->{n+p} Array@(n+p) {1}
    index   : (Array@(n+p) a@p) ->{0} a@p
    reverse : (Handle (n+p), Array@(n+p+q) a@p) ->{n+p} Array{n+p} a@p
    append  : (Handle (n+p), Array@(n+p+q) a@p, Array@(n+p+q) a@p) ->{n+p} Array@(n+p) a@p

The argument arrays of `reverse` and `append` have the additional `q` region
so that we can copy arrays from higher regions to lower regions. We are
always free to upcast into a higher region, but we cannot cast in the
other direction. Remember, we can use `lift` to turn the `n+p` on the arrow
into `n+p+q`.

In a way, the extra region variable that is associated with an argument
indicates whether or not that argument might be aliased by the result.
The functions `reverse` and `append` do not alias their argument. But
the identity function specialized to arrays would look like this:

    identity : (Array@(n+p) a@p) ->{0} Array{n+p} a@p

I'm noticing that the region annotation on the `Handle` argument always
matches the region annotation on the arrow. We could change how this
works and just have the handle be implicit. It's a little bit wrong
because when the annotation is `n+p`, it means that we have a handle
to `n`, `p`, and `n+p`, even though we only allocate into `n+p`.
But still, this could clean things up syntactically a bit. Actually,
it might only mean a handle to `p` and `n+p`, since `n` is not
meaningful on its own here. In fact, a function that looks like this
makes no sense:

    foo : (Foo@x, Bar@y, Baz@x+y) -> Bang@x

Because either `x` or `y` is a region, and the other one is a delta
between regions, not a region. So I might need different kinds for
some of these variables.

# Iterating

Here is something I have considered:

* Get rid of annotations on arrows
* Introduce a top type (⊤) for regions

Region variables cannot be instantiated with the ⊤, and we can pretend,
at any time, that any value is in region ⊤. We cannot ever allocate
into ⊤, meaning that there is no value of type `Handle ⊤`. We cannot
apply the successor function to ⊤ like we can for other regions.

    r    : Region
    n    : FinRegion
    Zero : FinRegion
    Succ : FinRegion -> FinRegion
    Fin  : FinRegion -> Region
    ⊤    : Region

And the subtype relationships:

    n          <:   Succ n
    r          <:   ⊤
    (n1 <: n2) ==> (Fin n1 <: Fin n2)

Below, I'm going to implicitly promote `FinRegion` to `Region` rather
that use the explicit `Fin` operator. Let's see how our array functions
look now:

    index     : (Array@⊤ a@p, S64) -> a@p
    reverse   : (Handle n, Array@⊤ a@p) -> Array@n a@p
    append    : (Handle n+m, Array@⊤ a@n, Array@⊤ a@n) -> Array@n+m a@n
    replicate : (Handle n+m, S64, a@n) -> Array@n+m a@n

The ⊤ construction really shines in `append`, where the argument arrays
don't need to live in the same region as anything else in the function.
Everything is much better except for `replicate`. It's still a struggle
to enforce the "outgoing references from region stacks form a DAG pointing
downward" constraint. I want `replicate` to look like the other functions,
but doing that would make it unsound. We could do this:

    replicate : {p <= n}(Handle n, S64, a@p) -> Array@n a@p

But dealing with this constraint is annoying. Maybe we could abandon the
constraint and push the burden onto the `with` function. Here's a type
signature of `with` based on `Succ` (+1):

    with  : Handle n -> (Handle (n+1) -> a@n) -> a@n
    withZ :          -> (Handle 1     -> a@0) -> a@0

If we do not annotate arrows, we have to use an existing handle to prove
where we are in the region stack. But now it's not even necessary a stack.
It's a tree. Because we can write this:

    // Suppose that (h0 : Handle n) is in scope
    with h0 (h1):
      with h0 (h2):
        ...

Both `h1` and `h2` have type `Handle n+1`, but they are not the same region.
This is strange, but I don't think this leads to unsoundness. An allocation
into `h1` cannot be returned from the inner `with`. That is, they both must
return things that live in `h0`.

So how do we stop bad things from escaping? Consider this bad program:

    with h0 (h1):
      array = with h1 (h2):
        foo = makeFoo{h2}
        array = replicate{h1}(100,foo)
        return array
      ...
      // Now array has dangling references

We could try requiring that `with` deal with concrete types. For example,
the bad program above returns an array with type `Array@n+1 Foo@n+2`, which
is clearly bad. But type abstraction means that we might not be able to
see this. What if the program did this instead:

    // Suppose (h0 : Handle n) and (x : a@n) are in scope
    y = with h0 (h1):
      return x

Clearly, this should be accepted, but if we instantiate `a` with a type
like `Array Foo@n+1`, then `x` has type `Array@n Foo@n+1`, and `with`
should reject it. We can try to make `Array@n Foo@n+1` not be a well formed
type at all. That would be nice, but it breaks region abstraction. We can
try to make `Array@n Foo@n+1` uninhabited, which is what I have been trying
to do, but that makes functions like `replicate` have bad types. So my next
attempt (what I'm trying to do here) is to try to make it impossible for
`with` to return something like this. But it seems like the only way to
accomplish this is to prohibit `with` from returning a value that includes
an abstract type. That's an unacceptable restriction. It makes it impossible
to use an ephemeral region to do things like selecting the maximum key-value
pairs from a collection of pairs where the values have an abstract type.

What about this:

    replicate : (Handle n, S64, a@p) -> Array@(max n p) a@p

This belongs in the "make bad types uninhabited" bucket. I do not like it.
I think I want to just go with this:

    index     : (            Array@⊤ a@n, S64) -> a@n
    reverse   : (Handle n+x, Array@⊤ a@n) -> Array@n+x a@n
    append    : (Handle n+x, Array@⊤ a@n, Array@⊤ a@n) -> Array@n+x a@n
    replicate : (Handle n+x, S64, a@n) -> Array@n+x a@n
    sum       : (            Array@⊤ S64@⊤) -> S64@0
    fold      : ((b@m, a@n) -> b@m, b@m, Array@⊤ a@n) -> b@m

The type of `fold` is interesting. We can see that `a` and `b` each have a
region associated with them, and these regions have no relation to one another.
