# No Nesting of Mutable Values 

(Note: This entry is a ramble, and I do not reach any conclusions)

I have convinced myself that

* Arrays (even mutable arrays) should not support mutable elements
* Immutable objects should not have mutable fields
* Type variables and abstract types should have kinds that indicate whether or
  not they contain mutable data. Immutable types would be more common since
  mutable types could not be used as arguments to HKT.

What does this let us accomplish?

## Disjoint Sets and Abstract Implementation

We need a "mutable record" construct for this to work. A mutable record may
contain mutable fields, and it itself is treated as mutable. That is, the argument
to `withMutation` cannot close over it. Because of this, it is tempting to say
that the fields of a mutable record should always be treated as read/write. But
we may not actually want that behavior, like in an implementation of
disjoint sets:

    sig DisjointSetSig
      type [mut] DisjointSet
      new    : Int => DisjointSet // takes maximum element as argument
      union  : (Int, Int, DisjointSet) => Unit
      find   : (Int, DisjointSet) => Int // returns representative element
    module DisjointSetImpl 
      type [mut] DisjointSet = mutable record
        { ranks : MutableArray Int   // length is n
        , parents : MutableArray Int // length is n
        }
      new(n):
        ranks <= newMutableArray(n,0)
        parents <= newMutableArray(n,0)
        ... set each parent to itself, omitting this
        pure { ranks = ranks, parents = parents }

We may want to be able to distinguish between objects that transitively
include any mutable data and objects whose fields can be reassigned.

## Mutable Array With Mutable Element vs Mutable Array of Immutable Struct

Sometimes, when a problem can be solved by a mutable array of mutable objects,
it can also be solved by a mutable array of structs. That is, the object is
simply unpacked into the array.

## Abstracting Over Mutable Types

Should it be possible to abstract over mutable types? If it is possible to
abstract over them, then we can hide the implementations of data structures
like disjoint set and mutable hash map. If not, then we must always see
the implementations of these when we use them. I think that it is preferable
to have the option to abstract over them.
