# Second-Class Mutable Data Wrinkles

For second-class data, it's actually fine if we have cycles because the
GC can just ignore second-class references. They are on the stack, so it's
going to get to them eventually since the entire scan is scanned. However,
I'm not sure that creating cyclic data will actually be possible.

Even though a second-class object can reference another second-class object,
it may only be a second-class object that lives above it in the stack. If
the child were further down the stack, then it could go out of scope while
the parent was live. So, for second-class mutable objects, we can assign
their fields to second-class values at initialization time, but we cannot
assign them to second-class values later (with a `writeField` builtin).
There is no way to safely do this because we may have access to
second-class fields from the wrong part of the stack.

Strangely, we can have a mutable object as a field of a second-class
object but not a first-class object. For example:

    MyType = construction
      { counter : S64
      , people : MutableArray Person
      }

We cannot create a first-class value of type `MyType`, but we can create
a second-class value of type `MyType`. This is because their are no
first-class terms that inhabit type `MutableArray Person`.

# Difficulty Reasoning With Mutation Everywhere

I'm still thinking through what I suggested on 2024-04-09. It's similar
SML and its derivatives. The differences are:

* My proposed system does not allow function to perform IO (e.g. write
  to stdout) without an IO effect.
* My proposed system does not have global mutable variables, so it is
  certain that functions with only immutable arguments are pure.

The user's reasoning should benefit somewhat from these restrictions. However,
I am a little bothered by how module signatures are unable to constrain
mutable. For example:

    functor MkOrdMap(a : Type)(ord : Module {lte : Function(a{1},a{1})(Bool)}) ...

Actually, by writing this out, I've realized that the argument `a` will be
a first-class argument, so it is not possible for an implementation of `lte`
to mutate one of the values.

# Argument Class in When Mapping Over Aray

Ran into this problem recently:

    map :: (a -> b) -> Array a -> Array b

What is the class of each argument?

* Array: second-class. It does not escape.
* Lambda: second-class. It does not escape. And I'm not certain that I even
  want first-class lambdas:
* The argument in the lambda: Second class? I think so.

Second class for all of these seems right. In the language I'm working on,
it will be possible to create arrays on the stack where all of the elements
are also on the stack. It won't be common to do that, and the type system
only gives you the knowledge that those *might* be on the stack. But if we
can do this, then we could build an array of a mutable type. And that's a
problem because the function argument could mutate the elements, and that's
an unintuitive behavior.

The problem is that class only gives us a guarantee about things escaping.
And I've traded away the guarantee that Haskell has about function arrows
implying that no mutation occurs. But I need to get this guarantee back,
possibly some other way. Really, we do not want `Array` to have elements
that are mutable. And similarly, we do not want object to have fields that
have mutable types. And we want this regardless of whether we are dealing
with first-class or second-class arrays/objects.

Here is one possible solution: separate kinds for mutable and immutable
types. I had gotten rid of this because I thought I didn't need it, but
I actually do. In the above example, if `a` and `b` are immutable types,
then the callback cannot perform any mutation. Or can it? Since it is
second class, it can close over (second-class) mutable values, and it
can mutate those. So we need to make the callback first-class, but now
we are prohibited from closing over immutable second-class values that
we might have liked to close over. Is there a way to get everything that
we want?

What about breaking the class system into three levels: mutable, stack, and
heap (in that order). Let's have mutable be 3, stack be 2, and heap be 1.
Now we may say:

    map :: (a {2} -> b) {2} -> (Array a) {2} -> Array b

And the callback may now close over stack-allocated immutable values, but it
may not close over anything mutable. The array argument can be stack allocated,
and this permission essentially bleeds through into its element, which is why
that's what the callback requires. Now the behavior is intuitive, and since
the callback cannot perform mutation, the compiler is free to lower it to
something that inspects the elements in any order.

It's tempting to try to get rid of a mutable array type and just handle it
with the class system. With what I proposed above, this doesn't work because
that would let the user cast an immutable array to a mutable array, which
would have disasterous consequences. But we might be able to use a non-total
ordering instead. Here is the lattice:

         top
        /   \
    stack    \
      ^       \
      |      mutable
    heap      |
      \      /
       \    /
        \  /
       bottom

I need to think about this possibility more.
