# Runtime Representation for Option and Result

Over the weekend, I thought some about how I might be able to represent
a type like `Option Person` or `Result Word16 Person` without using too
many bits. My conclusion is that there is not a good way to do this.
I think it is better to have runtime representations that only talk
about size, not about boxedness:

    type Rep = Finite 65 // all sizes up to 64 bytes

Then, for `Option` and `Result`, we have:

    Option : (a : r) -> (r + 1)
    Result : (a : ra) -> (b : rb) -> (1 + max ra rb)

These types do not need to be built in. All stack allocated types have
their size calculated by just summing the sizes of their fields, choosing
the alternative with the greatest size, and then adding the number 1 for
a tag byte.

This means that we cannot represent `Array (Option Foo)` in a particularly
efficient way, but I have decided that I can live with that. A possible
workaround for boxed types is to introduce an additional constructor
`Missing` and then prohibit it with refinements in most places.

If we handle runtime representation in this way, how does alignment work?
For example, `Option Foo` takes 5 bytes. Do we want the 4-byte component
(effectively a pointer) to be 4-byte aligned? Or does that not matter?
If we forego alignment, we get better behavior in cases where we pack
struct-like types into arrays. Consider an array of `Option Foo` or an array
of `Option Rgb`. This means that for many of our "read from object" operations,
we must first copy from the heap to the stack (`memcpy`), and the copy on the
stack will be aligned correctly. If we are compiling to C, the C compiler
should eliminate these redundant copies.

If we choose instead to respect alignment, then we would round up 5-byte,
6-byte, and 7-byte types to 8 bytes. The only purpose of these intermediate
sizes would be to help handle nestings of `Option` and `Result` without
making space requirements explode. This would mean that we could not represent
`Array Rgb` in the way that users expect it to be represented.

Let's examine the approach that does not provide alignment guarantees.
Suppose we have a boxed data type `Config`:

    data Config
      Config
        name       : Array U8
        precision  : S32
        identifier : U32
        cleanup    : Option CleanupConfig

This might be lowered to:

    struct Config {
      // Array has 4 bytes for pointer, 4 for remaining length,
      // and 4 for offset from start.
      uint8_t name[12];
      uint8_t precision[4];
      uint8_t identifier[4];
      uint8_t cleanup[5];
    }

Essentially, this whole thing is just a byte array with convenient names
for indices where fields begin. This works nicely for polymorphic types.
For example, let's consider the specialization of cons cells to 4-byte
types and to 8-byte types:

    struct Cons4 {
      uint8_t head[4];
      uint8_t tail[4];
    }
    struct Cons8 {
      uint8_t head[8];
      uint8_t tail[4];
    }

There is considerable cognitive overhead involved in loading members
from these. Reading the `head` from `Cons4`:

    char theHead[4];
    memcpy(theHead, myConsCell.head, 4);

If we instead use `uint32_t`, we could write:

    struct Cons4 {
      uint32_t head;
      uint32_t tail;
    }
    uint32_t theHead = myConsCell->head;

What about our 5-byte types? Those will still require a `memcpy`. Even
worse, they will be copied into a 5-byte array on the stack. I do not
love this. All struct-like types would just be represented as byte arrays
in C. We cannot use C structs for these because the C struct would be the
wrong size.

If we made the tags for struct-like types be 8 bytes, we might be able
to fix this. Then we could have:

    struct Option4 {
      uint64_t tag; // None: 0, Some: 1
      uint32_t value;
    }

Although a C compiler for x86-64 will pad this out to 16 bytes. So we
might should be more precise:

    struct Option4 {
      uint64_t tag; // None: 0, Some: 1
      uint32_t value;
      uint8_t padding[4];
    }

If we do this, we can the 16 bytes from our on-heap structure and `memcpy`
it to an on-stack `Option4`. And really, with a 4-byte value, we could do
this instead:

    struct Option4 {
      uint32_t tag; // None: 0, Some: 1
      uint32_t value;
    }
    // alternatively
    struct Option4 {
      uint8_t tag; // None: 0, Some: 1
      uint8_t padding[3];
      uint32_t value;
    }

Which brings `Option4` down to 8 bytes. This still isn't great for arrays,
but I don't think I am going to find a good solution there.

If we interpret size to imply alignment, we might end up runtime
representations like these:

    Rep = W1 | W2 | W3 | W4 | W5 | W6 | W7 | W8 | W12 | W16 | W24 | W32 | ...

The alignment is the greatest power of two that divides evenly into the size:

    alignment W1 = 1
    alignment W2 = 2
    alignment W3 = 1
    alignment W4 = 4
    alignment W5 = 1
    alignment W6 = 2
    alignment W7 = 1
    alignment W8 = 8
    alignment W12 = 4
    alignment _ = 8

This makes `Option` kind of strange. We do not want to just bump the size up
to the next number because that can reduce the alignment. Instead, we have
to increase to the next size class that has equal or greater alignment.
All the padding goes into the tag field (or maybe after it) so that the
fields that come after start at the appropriate alignment. So, for example:

    Rgb : W3
    Option Rgb : W4
    Option (Option Rgb) : W8
    Person : W4 // a boxed type (i.e. a pointer)
    Option Person : W8
    Option (Option Person) : W16
    Mac : W6 // a MAC address
    Option Mac : W8
    Option (Option Mac) : W16

This works pretty well. It's not perfect, but it's not bad. It wastes space,
but it's not terrible. We could improve this by tracking size and alignment
separately. That would lead to a greater number of runtime representations
and a slightly more complicated system. I just don't see enough benefit to
doing it.

For a `Result` type, we have:

    Error : W4 // a boxed type with a description of the error
    Result Error Person : W8

It's not common to store values of type `Result` in data structures. These
are usually returned and then either propogated upward or scrutinized
immidiately.
