# Stack-Allocated Arrays

Continuing from where I left off with the lattice idea on 2024-04-12.
A problem I've noticed is that, with the type system from the
Gentrification paper, we end up with arrays whose elements are
always first-class. Why? Consider the type of `index`:

    index : Array{2} a -> Int{2} -> a

This cannot return a second-class value. This implies that all the
elements are first-class values. And in my system, first class is
interpreted to mean heap allocated and second class to mean possibly
stack allocated. I really want index to look like this:

    index : Array{c} a -> Int{2} -> a{c}

But this is totally incompatible with the "no second-class return"
rule from Gentrification. We could CPS `index` to get something that is
admissible though:

    index : Array{c} a -> Int{2} -> (a{c} -> b){2} -> b

It's strange that such a transformation is possible. The CPS version
(which is awful and should not be exposed to a user) feels equivalent
to the inadmissible variant. At least, it's equivalent if we assume
that the user is required to do something with the return value of the
inadmissible variant.

Because I am interpreting class to mean allocation region, it appears that
primops can play by different rules. Consider two variants of `permute`:

    // Normal rules
    permuteOnHeap  : Array{1} a -> Array{2} Int -> Array{1} a
    // Cheater rules
    permuteOnStack : Array{2} a -> Array{2} Int -> Array{2} a

Unlike with `index`, we don't really want inferred class here. We may want
to permute a heap-allocated array but have the result live on the stack.
So if we had a polymorphic variant that handled both cases, we would need
to make it so that the user could explicitly provide the class.

Most primops do not have implementations that push a new frame onto the stack.
And even if they do, the implementation can be trusted to not return something
from the ephemeral stack frame. That's why they can break the rule.

I do not like having different typing rules for primops and user-defined
functions. It's messy. I'm able to see more clearly now what will be required
if this is not supported. Consider a simple `replicate` primop that
allocates onto the stack:

    // Cheater rules
    replicate : Int{2} -> a{2} -> Array{2} a
    // Normal Rules
    withReplication : Int{2} -> a{2} -> (Array{2} a -> b) -> b

Allocating any second-class value requires CPS. I had already accepted that
this was going to be required for mutable values that get frozen. I now
have to decide if this is acceptable for stack-allocated data as well.
This is a difficult question. CPS obscures data dependencies and makes
the IR awful to read for a human.

# Strange Alternative

What if, as an alternative to any of this, it were possible at runtime to
detect bad behavior and make it a deterministic failure. This means:

* For mutable values, read after freeze is ok but write after freeze
  is a crash.
* For stack-allocated values, an escaping stack allocation causes a crash
  right when the function returns.

I don't think that it is possible to do this without high runtime overhead.
