# More Thoughts About Top Type for Regions

On 2024-09-20, I decided that having a top type for regions does not work.
I thought about this a little more over the weekend, and now I feel even
more confident of this conclusion. One way to think about the top type
for regions is that it can be encoded with existentials. And existentials
lead to problems because they let values escape. 

# More Thoughts About Tracking Array Length

Array length, on the other hand, needs existentials. This becomes clear
when we consider the case of a heap-allocated object containing array fields:

    data Person:
      age: U16
      firstName: Array U8
      lastName: Array U8

The arrays are in the same region as the person itself. (We could have
the `Person` type accept a region type argument, but we do not want to
do this.) Nothing about the length of either array is known. Unlike
with regions, there is no way to say "inherit this property from the parent".
So we need an existentially quantified length for each.

If we wanted the lengths to match (a strange requirement for a person's name),
we would need to do this:

    data Person (n : Nat):
      age: U16
      firstName: Array n U8
      lastName: Array n U8

And then we could existentially quantify this one level up. Unlike in
GHC Haskell, we cannot define `Person` without the natural number
as a type argument.

So natural numbers, as they are used to track array lengths, are type arguments
that have a convenient syntax for existential quantification. This might
actually be done as a top type. It feels very similar to a refinement, but
it's not actually going to be implemented as a refinement.
