# Second-Class Data on Stack

## Problem Background

For context, I am thinking about the somewhat common case of maintaining a
context for error messages. This error context is typically a type whose
spined looks like that of a cons list. And the whole thing is backwards.
You have to reverse it in the end if you end up needing it. As an example,
consider an error context when parsing JSON. Most tools can show you something
like this:

    Error at: $.students.17.first_name

The context data type looks like this:

    data Ctx = Top | Key Text Ctx | Ix Int Ctx

So before the parse failure, we had this context built up:

    Key "first_name" (Ix 17 (Key "students" Top))

And then we reverse it when there is some kind of problem parsing `first_name`.

## Avoiding Unnecessary Heap Allocations

What if `Ctx` was defined as a stack allocated type? Stack-allocated types
have these properties:

* Second class. Cannot be returned from functions. Cannot be closed over
  by first-class functions.
* May have fields that refer to other stack-allocated data or to heap-allocated
  data.
* Do not support any kind of type abstraction
* Are allowed to live in an array (an array of pointers), but the array
  is a special array type that is itself second class.

Stack-allocated types are different from unboxed types. Unboxed types are
first class and have non-uniform representation. Stack-allocated types
are second class and have uniform representation (pointers).

## Pitfalls of Stack-Allocated Data

The lifetime of stack-allocated data is tied to stack frame. When a function
returns, all data allocated in its stack frame is deallocated. This is not
a problem when the number of stack allocations is finite. Stack allocations
inside of a recursive join point can be problematic. There are two
possibilities:

1. Each stack allocation is fed passed to the next recursive jump as the
   "accumulator". This result is growing stack use, but it is expected.
   Just don't allocate these on the stack if you are expecting a huge
   chain to get built up.
2. One or more stack allocations occur, but the objects go out of scope
   before jumping. Stack use grows if we do not eagerly reclaim the space.
   We have to reclaim this space as soon as we are able to. If we do not,
   we will be leaking stack space when the user does not expect this
   to happen.

## Possible Workaround

We could introduce a "with stack frame" construct that prevents stack
allocations from escaping. This construct is essentially a second-class
function. It closes over all existing stack-allocated values, but it
cannot return a stack-allocated value. At the end of the computation,
the stack pointer is walked back to whatever it was at the beginning.

Note that all function calls implicitly have a "with stack frame" wrapping
them. This means that, when inlining functions, an explicit "with stack frame"
should appear around the inlined function body.

# Tags for Search

tag:stackframe, tag:stackallocate, tag:secondclass, tag:secondclassdata
