# Scoped Mutation

The paper [Gentrification Gone Too Far](https://www.cs.purdue.edu/homes/rompf/papers/osvald-oopsla16.pdf),
suggests a simple system for preventing escape. The first two of these are
word-for-word from the paper. The others are my own corollaries:

1. First-class functions may not refer to second-class values
   through free variables.
2. All functions must return first-class values, and only first-class
   values may be stored in object fields or mutable variables.
3. Second-class functions may close over second-class values.

If we use this to deal with mutable/immutable arrays, we get something
like this:

* `Array`: first-class array
* `Array*`: second-class immutable array
* `MutableArray*`: mutable array (mutable arrays are only second class)

Remember that `A -> B` is a first-class function and `A *-> B)` is a
second-class function. These also use `=>` for sequenced operations
(that need mutation) and `->` for normal stuff. Here are some examples
of functions:

    // May use first-class immutable arrays as second-class
    // immutable arrays.
    Array a :< Array* a
    // Functions
    write     : (MutableArray* a, Int, a) => Unit
    read      : (MutableArray* a, Int) => a
    index     : (Array* a, Int) -> a
    sum       : Array* Int -> Int
    withArray : (Int, a, MutableArray* a => b) -> b
    makeArray : (Int, a, MutableArray* a => Unit) -> Array a
    borrow    : (MutableArray* a, Array* a *-> b) => b

When we `borrow`, the computation is second class, so it may close
over other second-class values. But when we allocate using `withArray`,
the computation is first-class, so we cannot mutate any other arrays
in the computation. The primitives `withArray` and `makeArray` are nearly
the same thing, but `makeArray` freezes the array at the end. What we
actually need is a more general polyvariadic primitive that lets us
concurrently allocate any number of arrays. That way, we may interleave
their mutation. A polyvariadic borrow doesn't improve expressiveness,
but it is syntactically nice to have.

In this system, we can use a first-class value as a second-class value,
and this can be done safely with subtyping. So, syntactically, this is
lightweight. Borrowing (using a mutable array as an immutable array),
has more syntactic overhead and is more likely to inhibit optimization.
But I think this cost is acceptable.

I am noticing that there are some additional options:

    withArray  : (Int, a, MutableArray* a  => b) -> b  // as before
    withArrayM : (Int, a, MutableArray* a *=> b) => b

The `withArrayM` variant of `withArray` may close over existing second-class
values in the context. This is sound because any mutation of those values
is locked into place by `withArrayM`'s sequenced function type.

One odd thing about this system is that we do not have an explicit freeze
operation. Freezing happens at the end of `makeArray`. So if we want to
give up and discard the array, we need something like this:

    makeArrayOpt : (Int, a, MutableArray* a => Bool) -> Option (Array a)

This gets complicated if we need to simultaneously create several arrays
and possibly throw away only some of them. But in that case, we could
just return them all (freezing them) and then figure out which ones to
keep and throw away on the other side.

# ANF With Scoped Sections

Scoping second-class values makes lowering to ANF awkward. For example:

    x = myFunc(a,b)
    y = myFunc(x,x)
    z = withArray(100,x){myMutArray}:
      write(myMutArray,0,y)
      write(myMutArray,1,y)
      ...
      k <= read(myMutArray,1)
      pure k
    w = ...

The purpose of ANF is to make it so that the RHS of each let binding is
something simple. Typically, it needs to be function application to atoms
or primop application to atoms. To an extent, we have to give that up.
We can still require that applications (of both user-defined functions
and primops) be saturated with atoms. And the RHS of a let binding
cannot be just any expression. For example, it cannot start with a let
binding.

Ultimately, lowering from this variant of ANF should not be much more
complicated. When we encounter a scoped section, we do not create a
new basic block for it. We just keep dumping things into the existing
basic block.
