# No Private Functions

In the lowest-level language, no functions should be private. This
is not a meaningful distinction at this stage.

# Namespacing and the File System

I want the user-friendly version of the low-level language to support a very
lightweight version of namespacing, one that adds no expressivity. The question
of how to interact with the file system comes up immidiately. Here are my
thoughts:

* Users should not be able to define the same namespace twice.
* Files should correspond to namespaces. This should not require writing
  out the namespace in the file.
* Directories create nested namespaces. Users can also create nested namespaces
  in a single file. But for each parent namespace, they have to choose either
  one or the other. That is, if you create a namespace as a directory, the only
  thing it can have in it is other namespaces, and these all have to be defined
  as separate files.

One thing that bothers me is figuring out how to deal with separate compilation
and with dependencies. I think it might be necessary to introduce the concept
of a package, which lives at a higher level than namespaces. At the package
level, we cannot have cyclic dependencies. But at the namespace level,
we should be allowed to do basically anything. That is, within a package,
any function in any namespace can refer to any other function in any other
namespace. We can use the relative-function-path syntax for this or we could
use a package-relative-path syntax. Either of these would work.

This makes packages, not namespaces, compilation units. Any change to a file
inside of a package requires, in the worst case, rebuilding the entire package.
I don't particularly like this. It's a pretty superficial distinction, and
it results in users splitting things into packages to improve the compiler's
behavior.

Instead, we could just have namespaces, and we could ban cyclic references.
Any namespace could reference any other namespace, and that would be fine.
The compiler would first build a list of all references between namespaces.
It only cares about references to types in other namespaces, not references
to functions. There are no import lists, so the compiler must scan every
function body to do this. Then it checks for cycles. If there are no cycles,
then the namespaces can be arranged into a partial order. The compiler visits
each namespace, in the appropriate order, and extracts type information
from every function and every data type. This has to be done in a correct
order so that we do not reference a data type that does not exist yet.
Finally, we can typecheck everything, and this can be done in any order
because we have a giant set of all of the signatures.

I'm not convinced that the strategy I suggested makes sense. The goal is
to prevent spurious recompiles. Changing a function body (without changing
the type signature of the function) should never cause anything other than
that one function to be rebuilt or even retypechecked. Messing with types
is how you can hurt things downstream. If you change the type of a function,
you have to retypecheck every call site. If you mess with the data constructors
of a boxed type, you have to retypecheck every pattern-match site and every
construction site.

What am I trying to say? Maybe namespaces aren't even the right compilation
unit. Maybe it's just functions and data-type definitions. Maybe namespaces
really are just syntactic sugar that should get flattened very early in
the compilation process.

