# Linear Region APIs and Graph-Based Representations

Graph-based IRs (e.g. FIRM) work best when dependencies are explicit.
However, a CPSed variant of linear types gives us poor information about
dependencies when freeing a region: 

    new  : Unit -> exists r. (Capability r {1}, Handle r)
    free : Capability r {1} -> Unit

The problem with `free` is that nothing depends on it. If we remove a call
to `free` from a correct problem, it will become an incorrect program. That
transformation would cause a capability that had previously been consumed
to not be consumed.

In a graph-based IR, nothing is tugged on the call to `free`. That is, nothing
forces it to happen. FIRM has to deal with a related problem:
[Endless Loops](https://pp.ipd.kit.edu/firm/Endless_Loops.html). The project
page describes it this way:

> Endless loops may not have any control flow leading to the End node.
> Worse in a dependency graph such loops are not connected with the
> End node and thus invisibile.
>
> Endless loops are observable behaviour. Even if they don't contain
> any memory operations themselves, they must use the memory leading
> into the loop and produce a new memory value. Failing to do that may
> lead to memory operations before the loop getting dropped or moved
> across the loop which is invalid for endless loops.
>
> Our current solution to these problems, is to introduce a special
> edge class called keep-alive edges. Keep-alive edges are inputs
> of the End node. They are unusual in that they don't necessarily
> respect the SSA dominance property (the def may not dominate
> the use at the End node).

However, what I'm trying to do is distinguished from what FIRM tries to do
by the availability of data dependencies that I have. In my language, and
endless loop (that is not an IO action) cannot do anything observable, so
it can be discarded.

I think that I might just need to treat any calls to `free` as unremovable.
Within a basic block, `free` is, in a way, anchored as a root. This means
that any jumps (that end the basic block) imply that all calls to `free`
in the block have been performed.

# Another Attempt at withSmall

I tried this on 2024-09-16, but I'd like to try again. This time, I'm
going to overallocate and then copy into a smaller buffer at the end:

    findSmall : (Handle r, Array S64, Capability r {1}) -> (Array@r S64, Capability r {1})
    findSmall(h,capR,src):
      {n} srcVec, len = exposeArray(src)
      {s} tmpHnd, tmpCap0 = newRegion
      case n:
        Zero: return emptyArray, capR
        Nonzero (finZero : Fin n):
          finish(capS : Capability s {1}, dstA : Array<n> S64 @s {1}, dstLen : Fin (n+1)) -> (Array@r S64):
            {m} = finToNat dstLen
            // Note sure if freezing needs a capability. It depends on whether
            // or not it actually accesses the memory.
            frozenDstA, capS' = freeze(dstA,capS)
            result, capS'', capR' = cloneSliceAndFreeze(h,capS',capR,frozenDstA,dstLen)
            free(tmpHnd,capS'')
            return result, capR'
          dst1 : Array<n> S64, tmpCap1 = newArray(tmpCap0,tmpHnd,len,0s64)
          loop*(capA : Capability s {1}, dstA : Array<n> S64 {1}, srcIx : Fin n, dstIx : Fin n) -> (Array@r S64):
            value = index(srcVec,srcIx)
            compare value 42s64:
              LT:
                capB, dstB = write(capA, dstA, dstIx, value)
                case-successor{n}(srcIx):
                  None:
                    dstIx' : Fin (n+1) = successor(dstIx)
                    jump finish(capB,dstB,dstIx')
                  Some srcIxNext: case-successor{n}(dstIx):
                    None: error("Destination index should not be greater than source index")
                    Some dstIxNext: jump loop(capB, dstB, srcIxNext, dstIxNext)
              GE:
                case-successor{n}(srcIx):
                  None: jump finish(capA,dstA,dstIx)
                  Some srcIxNext: jump loop(capA,dstA,srcIxNext,dstIx)
          jump loop(tmpCap1,dst1,finZero,finZero)

This is ok, but it's not great. The type system cannot show the destination
index is always smaller than then source index. So there's a bit of noise
in the definition of `loop`. One thing that could help is an abstraction
for a pair of finite numbers where the first is greater than or equal to
the second one:

    FinPair : Nat -> Type
    caseSuccessorFinPair : ... // builtin construct
    makeFinPair : Fin n -> FinPair n // put the same number in both slots
    upper : FinPair -> Fin n
    lower : FinPair -> Fin n

Now we can rewrite the loop as:

    loop*(capA : Capability s {1}, dstA : Array<n> S64 {1}, ixs : FinPair n) -> (Array@r S64):
      value = index(srcVec,srcIx)
      compare value 42s64:
        LT:
          capB, dstB = write(capA, dstA, ixs.lower, value)
          case-successor-fin-pair{n}(ixs):
            None:
              dstIx' : Fin (n+1) = successor(ixs.lower)
              jump finish(capB,dstB,dstIx')
            Some ixsNext: jump loop(capB, dstB, ixsNext)
        GE:
          case-successor-fin-pair{n}(ixs):
            None: jump finish(capA,dstA,ixs.lower)
            Some srcIxNext: jump loop(capA,dstA,ixs)

But even better would be if we could do this:

    loop*(capA : Capability s {1}, dstA : Array<n> S64 {1}, srcIxWitness : Nat srcIx, dstIxWitness : Nat dstIx, prfA : dstIx <= srcIx, prfB : srcIx < n) -> (Array@r S64):
      value = index(srcVec,srcIx)
      after(capC : Capability s {1}, dstC : Array<n> S64 {1}, nextDstIxWitness : Nat nextDstIx, prfA : nextDstIx <= srcIx+1) -> (Array@r S64):
        srcIxSucc = srcIxWitness + 1
        proveLt(srcIxSucc,n):
          False: jump finish(capA,dstA,nextDstIxWitness)
          True srcIxSuccLtN: jump loop(capA,dstA,srcIxSucc,nextDstIxWitness,succ(prfA),srcIxSuccLtN)
      compare value 42s64:
        LT:
          capB, dstB = write(capA, dstA, dstIx, value)
          jump after(capB,dstB,succ(dstIx),succ(prfA))
        GE: jump after(capA,dstA,dstIx,succRhs(prfA))

That's the right way to do it. I had lost sight of the fact that `Fin` is
just a convenient representation of something more fundamental:

    pack   : forall (n : Nat) (i : Nat). NatWitness i -> (i < n) -> Fin n
    unpack : forall (n : Nat). Fin n -> exists (i : Nat). (NatWitness i, i < n)

We need `Fin` because existentials in type signatures are awful, and most
user-facing types can use `Fin` instead.

One last time. All together:

    findSmall : (Handle r, Array S64, Capability r {1}) -> (Array@r S64, Capability r {1})
    findSmall(h,capR,src):
      {n} srcVec, len = exposeArray(src)
      {s} tmpHnd, tmpCap0 = newRegion
      compare 0 n:
        GE: return emptyArray, capR
        LT zltn:
          finish(capS : Capability s {1}, dstA : Array<n> S64 @s {1}, dstLen : Nat dlen, prf : dlen <= n) -> (Array@r S64):
            frozenDstA, capS' = freeze(dstA,capS)
            result, capS'', capR' = cloneSliceAndFreeze(h,capS',capR,frozenDstA,dstLen,prf)
            free(tmpHnd,capS'')
            return result, capR'
          dst1 : Array<n> S64, tmpCap1 = newArray(tmpCap0,tmpHnd,len,0s64)
          loop*(capA : Capability s {1}, dstA : Array<n> S64 {1}, srcIxWitness : Nat srcIx, dstIxWitness : Nat dstIx, prfA : dstIx <= srcIx, prfB : srcIx < n) -> (Array@r S64):
            value = index(srcVec,srcIx)
            after(capC : Capability s {1}, dstC : Array<n> S64 {1}, nextDstIxWitness : Nat nextDstIx, prfC : nextDstIx <= srcIx+1) -> (Array@r S64):
              srcIxSucc = srcIxWitness + 1
              proveLt(srcIxSucc,n):
                False: jump finish(capA,dstA,nextDstIxWitness,transitive(prfB,prfC))
                True srcIxSuccLtN: jump loop(capA,dstA,srcIxSucc,nextDstIxWitness,succ(prfC),srcIxSuccLtN)
            compare value 42s64:
              LT:
                capB, dstB = write(capA, dstA, dstIx, value)
                jump after(capB,dstB,succ(dstIx),succ(prfA))
              GE: jump after(capA,dstA,dstIx,succRhs(prfA))
          jump loop(tmpCap1,dst1,0,0,reflexiveLte 0,zltn)

Still, it's worth nothing that this is not the best way to do this. It's
almost certainly better to count the matches first and then directly allocate
something that is the right size.
