# Regions for Freezing

Linear type systems typically model freezing as a per-object operation.
With region types, we have to freeze the entire region (not just a single
object in the region). There are several ways to accomplish this. We could
have two capabilities, one for reading and one for writing, and allow them
to be destroyed at different times. This way, a function that only needs
to read from a data structure would only take the read capability. This
is cumbersome to use, and I don't think it is actually a good way to do this.
To improve the ergonomics, we could have a single capability, but it
would support some kind of subtyping coercion that allows a read-write
capability to be degraded to a read capability.

# Ordered Regions

If regions are partially ordered, we can pretend that an object from
an earlier region belongs to a later region. Here is an example of
an interface for dealing with a mutable map:

    -- updates the map in place
    insert : Map a @r -> S64 -> a @r -> Map a @r
    lookup : Map a @r -> S64 -> Option a @r

This means that we can build a map of things from an earlier region
like this:

    // x, y, z are values of type Foo in region k
    s : Region, proof : (k <: s) = region[depends on k]
    m0 : Map Foo @s = allocate(Map Foo)(s)
    m1 = insert(m0,10,coerce(x,proof))
    m2 = insert(m1,11,coerce(y,proof))
    m3 = insert(m2,12,coerce(z,proof))
    result : Option Foo @s = lookup(m3,11)

Notice that this type system can track about `result` is that it is in
region `s`. A different type system (like Cyclone's) could more accurately
tell us that the result is in region `k`. But I don't like data strucutures
to have the flexibility of storing data in a bunch of different regions.
It's more simple if the region annotation on each object is simply pushed
all the way down into the object.

I am not fully convinced that my variation on data structures is the
right way to go. Pursued to an logical extreme, it implies that tuples
should have all elements in the same region (reasonable), which in turn
implies that all arguments to a function should be in the same region
(less reasonable). This leads to programs that are only able to release
a region by return some kind of primitive data (not heap allocated)
because they have forgotten what regions all of their objects actually
belonged to.

This suggests that it should be possible to instantiate type variables
with types that include their own region annotation (e.g. `Map (a @r1) @r2`).
The existence of such a value a witness that `r1 <: r2`, since `r1` must
outlive `r2`. But I don't like this because it does not play nicely
with module systems. Or maybe it's fine. Let's do ordered maps:

    sig Ordering
      a : RawType
      lt : (r : Region) -> a@r -> a@r -> Bool
    module OrderedMap
      Map (a : TypeInRegion) @r = Bin (Map a @r) S64 (Map a @r) | Tip S64 a
      singleton : (r : Region) -> (a : TypeInRegion) -> S64 -> a -> Map a @r

I don't particularly like this. Here's a variant that I also do not like: 

    module OrderedMap
      Map (s : Region) (a : RawType) @r = Bin (Map a@s @r) S64 (Map a@s @r) | Tip S64 a@s
      singleton : (r : Region) -> (s : Region) -> (a : RawType) -> S64 -> a@s -> Map s a @r

In this system, you cannot introduce a `TypeInRegion` anymore. But this is
still awful, and it makes more type variables show up everywhere. If we
disallow data structures that reference multiple regions, we get this instead:

    sig Ordering
      a : Type
      lt : (r : Region) -> a@r -> a@r -> Bool
    module OrderedMap
      -- Note: Map does not need region annotations because
      -- everything is in the same region.
      Map (a : Type) = Bin (Map a) S64 (Map a) | Tip S64 a
      singleton : (r : Region) -> (a : Type) -> S64 -> a @r -> Map a @r

Less expressive, but also more simple. What I'm not sure of is how often it's
actually useful to have child elements with more precise region annotations.
Here are some scenarios that I can think of:

* JSON syntax tree. More precise information about strings is not useful.
  Any escaped strings live in the child region, so we need to coerce.
* Containers with primitive elements. More precise information is not useful.
  Primitive types do not live in an actual region and can be freely coerced
  to any region.

So maybe this is not needed.

# Merge Child Region Into Parent Region

It would be neat to have a primitive that joins a child region into a parent
region. This could be useful if we were allocating into a child region and
did not know if the work would be committed or discarded.

# Things That Are Difficult To Do With Regions

Imagine having some kind of queue of tasks. As each task is dequeued, we need
to deallocate the representation of the task. Regions are not great for this
kind of thing. You can package them up with existential types, but then you
need a GC to trace the heap and figure out when your regions die.

But if the queue is bounded (which is a normal thing to do), we could instead
have the queue be just one region. Writing a task just replaces a previously
consumed task. This works if all task can be flattened out. Then the array
backing the queue can be an array of structs. But if the tasks reference
strings, we cannot do this. Here are some thoughts about ways we might resolve
this problem:

* Support explicit deallocation from regions. This requires linear types
  (or uniqueness types). It also seems to push regions in the wrong direction.
  The intent of a region is that it is a unit of things that stay live
  together. If we can deallocate from regions, then the strategy for allocating
  from them needs to become more complicated.
* Existentially quantified regions. Each slot has its own region. Regions are
  reference counted, which is much cheaper than reference counting individual
  objects. Should we require freezing a region before packing existentially?
  Probably. Once you open one of these back up, you've got no idea what it
  aliases, and you shouldn't be able to allocate anything else into the region.

# Existentially Quantified Regions

Can we combine existentially quantified regions with the "deep region
application" technique? Probably. We could reuse the same `Map` type from
earlier:

    Pack : Type -> Type
    Map Person        // All people are in the same region
    Map (Pack Person) // Each person is in their own region

We values of type `Pack T` have region annotations (e.g. `Pack T @r`), but
these works like the region annotations on integers. They can be coerced
to any region because the annotation is unimportant.

# How Does RC on Packed Region Work

For a packed region, we want to track RC when we move the packed region
around, but we don't want to track movement of the region capability
after the packed region is opened. This puts us in a weird place. After
opening a packed region, we need to keep it live. But how do we know
when it dies. I think we could required the capability to be consumed
linearly. Then, since it has to be destroyed, the destruction site
is where we perform an RC decrement.

Darn. If we are consuming capabilities linearly, we have to thread them
through the program. I was trying to avoid doing this.

We can probably just figure out where the unpacked region goes out of
scope. We could perform an increment when it is opened and a decrement
when it stops being used. Or, in the case where the packed region
is not reused after it is done being unpacked, we could just skip
the initial increment.

# Problem with Packed Regions

What happens when we free a region that references other regions hidden
by existential quantifiers? Freeing a region should not result in a
scan of the region. I'm not sure how else we could find the children
though. I need to think about this more later.

# Low-Level Language

In a reference-counted system, it's not enough to just track the widths
of types. We need to know if they contain data that has an associated
RC or not. Maybe we could just ban user-defined structs with packed
regions in them. Then we would have 12 or so sizes for types that do
not include packed regions. And we would have a single kind for packed
region types. This should work.

# Packing a Child Region

A child region must outlive its parent. So if we pack a child region,
it keeps the parent live. Doing this should not be terribly common
though.
