# The Wild World of D-Bus

I'm taking notes on things that work. Eventually, I hope to piece together
a coherent mental model of D-Bus.

Add the network interface named `wlan0` to `wpa_supplicant`:

    $ gdbus call --system --dest=fi.w1.wpa_supplicant1 --object-path=/fi/w1/wpa_supplicant1 --method=fi.w1.wpa_supplicant1.CreateInterface "{'Ifname': <'wlan0'>}"
    (objectpath '/fi/w1/wpa_supplicant1/Interfaces/0',)

Now we can see the wpa-supplicant-managed interface that has been created.
WPA supplicant calls it "interface 0":

    $ gdbus call --system --dest=fi.w1.wpa_supplicant1 --object-path=/fi/w1/wpa_supplicant1 --method=org.freedesktop.DBus.Properties.GetAll fi.w1.wpa_supplicant1
    ({'DebugLevel': <'info'>, 'DebugTimestamp': <false>, 'DebugShowKeys': <false>, 'Interfaces': <[objectpath '/fi/w1/wpa_supplicant1/Interfaces/0']>, 'EapMethods': <['MD5', 'TLS', 'WFA-UNAUTH-TLS', 'MSCHAPV2', 'PEAP', 'TTLS', 'GTC', 'OTP', 'LEAP', 'FAST', 'PAX', 'SAKE', 'GPSK', 'WSC', 'IKEV2', 'TNC', 'PWD']>, 'Capabilities': <['ap', 'ibss-rsn', 'p2p', 'interworking', 'pmf', 'ft', 'sha384']>, 'WFDIEs': <@ay []>},)

Now that we have a new object path, we can introspect:

    $ gdbus introspect --xml --system --dest=fi.w1.wpa_supplicant1 --recurse --object-path=/fi/w1/wpa_supplicant1/Interfaces/0
    ... a bunch of XML ...

We can clean this up with `xmllint --format` and look at some of the methods
available:

    <node>
      <interface name="org.freedesktop.DBus.Introspectable">...</interface>
      <interface name="org.freedesktop.DBus.Properties">...</interface>
      <interface name="fi.w1.wpa_supplicant1.Interface">
        <method name="Scan">
          <arg name="args" type="a{sv}" direction="in"/>
        </method>
        <method name="SignalPoll">
          <arg name="args" type="a{sv}" direction="out"/>
        </method>
        <method name="Disconnect"/>
        <method name="AddNetwork">
          <arg name="args" type="a{sv}" direction="in"/>
          <arg name="path" type="o" direction="out"/>
        </method>
        <method name="Reassociate"/>
        <method name="Reattach"/>
        ...
      </interface>
    </node>

It's kind of weird that we cannot introspect until we have created an
interface, but whatever. Now, let's get a value for one of a property:

    $ dbus-send --system --dest=fi.w1.wpa_supplicant1 --print-reply /fi/w1/wpa_supplicant1/Interfaces/0 org.freedesktop.DBus.Properties.Get string:fi.w1.wpa_supplicant1.Interface string:State
    method return time=1729615707.529033 sender=:1.12 -> destination=:1.299 serial=96 reply_serial=2
    variant       string "completed"

Here's another example:

    $ dbus-send --system --dest=fi.w1.wpa_supplicant1 --print-reply /fi/w1/wpa_supplicant1/Interfaces/0/Networks/0 org.freedesktop.DBus.Properties.Get string:fi.w1.wpa_supplicant1.Network string:Enabled
    method return time=1729627950.905092 sender=:1.12 -> destination=:1.345 serial=98 reply_serial=2
   variant       boolean true

And to enable a network:

    $ dbus-send --system --dest=fi.w1.wpa_supplicant1 --print-reply /fi/w1/wpa_supplicant1/Interfaces/0/Networks/0 org.freedesktop.DBus.Properties.Set string:fi.w1.wpa_supplicant1.Network string:Enabled variant:boolean:true
    method return time=1729629111.598691 sender=:1.17 -> destination=:1.55 serial=26 reply_serial=2

# Interpretation of CreateInterface Argument

I think I understand what `a{sv}` means in `CreateInterface` now.
For reference:

    <method name="CreateInterface">
      <arg name="args" type="a{sv}" direction="in"/>                        
      <arg name="path" type="o" direction="out"/>                           
    </method>

This means "an array of pairs, where each pair has a string as the first
element and a variant as the second element". The WPA Supplicant project
page has [documentation](https://w1.fi/wpa_supplicant/devel/dbus.html)
explaining this further:

* Ifname (s): Name of the network interface to control, e.g., wlan0 (required)
* BridgeIfname (s): Name of the bridge interface to control, e.g., br0 (optional)
* Driver (s): Driver name which the interface uses, e.g., nl80211 (optional)
* ConfigFile (s): Configuration file path (optional)

Basically, WPA supplicant has completely subverted the D-Bus schema system.
The advantage of this is that WPA supplicant can add or remove fields without
the D-Bus schema changing. The disadvantage is that D-Bus code generators
become less useful, and the introspected D-Bus schema does not give a user
enough information to query WPA Supplicant.

This must be pretty common. Even glib has an alias for it: `G_VARIANT_TYPE_VARDICT`.
There is also a `GVariantDict` to help build these.
