# Compiling Modules Without Inlining

I've been trying to see how far I could get with separate compilation. I've
figured out a way to get polymorphism working. Second-class closures are also
doable, but they require uniformly representing values, which means padding
things out in my system. Modules seems like they are going to have the same
uniform-representation requirement. But with modules, I've realized that there
is one addition degree of freedom available.

One strategy for compiling a module function is to build a table a function
pointers. We don't need a table for data type instantiations because all data
will be represented uniformly. Any time you call a function that is part of
a module-functor instantiation, you have to provide a table as an extra
argument. Every call to a function that an abstract part of a signature
is handled by dynamic dispatch. We probably need tables inside of tables
for the case where a smaller signature is part of a bigger signature. But
any time we did this, we should just have the function pointer duplicated
into both spots. All of these are resolved at compile time, so we only
care about optimizing access time for these tables. Build time is irrelevant.

I'm wondering if it's possible to do something similar and use the linker
to specialize. This would eliminate dynamic dispatch. If a linker performed
specialization, I would think that it would be cheap. I'm not sure if it is
possible to actually use a linker this way though. Let's try. Here's a
simple C source file:

    #include <stdint.h>
    int64_t beta(int64_t x, int64_t y);
    int64_t alpha(int64_t a) {
    	int64_t b = a * 19;
    	int64_t c = beta(b,5000);
    	int64_t d = beta(a,b);
    	return c + d;
    }

Build with `gcc -fno-stack-protector -O2 -c replace-func-call.c` and then
take a look with `objdump -d replace-func-call.o`:

    Disassembly of section .text:
    0000000000000000 <alpha>:
       0:	f3 0f 1e fa          	endbr64
       4:	41 54                	push   %r12
       6:	48 8d 04 ff          	lea    (%rdi,%rdi,8),%rax
       a:	be 88 13 00 00       	mov    $0x1388,%esi
       f:	55                   	push   %rbp
      10:	4c 8d 24 47          	lea    (%rdi,%rax,2),%r12
      14:	53                   	push   %rbx
      15:	48 89 fb             	mov    %rdi,%rbx
      18:	4c 89 e7             	mov    %r12,%rdi
      1b:	e8 00 00 00 00       	call   20 <alpha+0x20>
      20:	4c 89 e6             	mov    %r12,%rsi
      23:	48 89 df             	mov    %rbx,%rdi
      26:	48 89 c5             	mov    %rax,%rbp
      29:	e8 00 00 00 00       	call   2e <alpha+0x2e>
      2e:	5b                   	pop    %rbx
      2f:	48 01 e8             	add    %rbp,%rax
      32:	5d                   	pop    %rbp
      33:	41 5c                	pop    %r12
      35:	c3                   	ret

Now the relocation table (`objdump -r replace-func-call.o`):

    RELOCATION RECORDS FOR [.text]:
    OFFSET           TYPE              VALUE
    000000000000001c R_X86_64_PLT32    beta-0x0000000000000004
    000000000000002a R_X86_64_PLT32    beta-0x0000000000000004

Cool. Four bytes at position 0x1c and four more bytes at position 0x2a.
What I'm trying to do is make a copy of the object file and rewrite
the relocation table. That seems doable. I don't think it's actually
a good idea to do this. This has some of the downsides of specialization,
like requiring more things to get rebuilt when a function that makes
"virtual" function calls changes. But the rebuilds only require relinking.
But since we only specializing linking, we miss some of the useful benefits
of specialization, like inlining. It would be great to inline the virtual
function if it were something tiny, but a linker cannot do that. (The linkers
for C can, but that's because there's a bunch of magic to support it.) And
we also pay the cost of having the executable to larger.

I've still got other strategies I'm thinking about. We could play games
with virtual memory to create multiple copies of a function with different
parts replaced, but this might break profiling. The most interesting thing
about this approach is that we could have something like inlining but without
having to pay the cost of bigger binaries. It's tricky though because we want
the little inlined parts (which we would actually need to jump to) to be
independent of the rest of the function body. And that's hard because of
register allocation.
