# Syntax Thoughts

I wrote out an example program today:

    fn enumerate{r : Region, n : Nat}[r](Handle r)(Array n i32 @r)
    as (h): 
      loop*(dst : Array n i32 @r, ix : Fin n):
        value : i32 = finToI32(ix)
        dstNext : Array n i32 @r = array.write{r,n,i32}(dst,ix,value)
        casefin ix:
          0: return dst
          1+pred: jump loop(dstNext, pred)
      casenat n:
        0:
          e : Array 0 i32 @R0 = array.empty{i32}()
          return e
        1+k:
          initDst : Array n i32 @r = array.new{r,n,i32}(h,i32(0))
          jump loop(initDst,k)

Several notes:

* I don't want to distinguish between relevant and irrelevant natural. I want
  to just pretend that they are always relevant. I need a better syntax for
  this. They really should not be lumped in with region and type variables.
* I've added something like Haskell 98's n+k patterns for destructuring
  nat and fin into fin. I actually think this reads nicely in this context.
* When we scrutinize `n` with an n+k pattern, we can learn that it is zero.
  We need a way to communicate this. This example code will not actually
  typecheck right now. One solution is GHC-style type equalities. Another
  solution is manually threading the proof around. The first one is more
  difficult to implement in a compiler. The second one is more difficult to
  use as a user.
* Compare these two syntaxes: `Array n i32 @r` and `Array@r n i32`.
  The second form is more clear, but we really should not apply a region
  until the boxed type constructor is fully applied. Another option is
  `(Array n i32)@r`. And another is `r+Array n i32`.
  
