# Subtyping Instead of Coercions

On 2024-06-29, I explored a way to avoid subtyping. The resulting language
is more difficult for a user to use, but the typechecker and code generator
are somewhat more simple to write. I have decided that this is not a good
path to pursue. For the rest of this entry, I'm going to focus on some of
the specific issues that I have encountered with subtyping and how they might
be addressed in other ways.

## Typechecking Equirecursive Types

It is difficult to tell if one equirecursive type is a subtype of another.
But I think there is a decision prodecure for this that is guaranteed to
terminate. I can start by just handling a few common cases though and
throwing an error when the typechecking encounters two types that I have
not thought about how to compare against one another.

## Codegen for ADTs

To lower ADTs to C structs, I have been dumping each data constructor into
a union. This works, but it's not a great long-term solution since it causes
too much memory to be allocated for all but the largest data constructor.

The solution is to annotate where upcasts happen but this only has to be
done for the upcasts of ADTs. I already have a pass that annotates the
program with types, so it's just another annotation to add. All of these
upcasts will correspond to C cast.

## Deallocation Without Exact Struct Type Match

Deallocating mutable objects that have linear fields requires making an
on-stack shallow copy of the object. (We have to consume the linear fields.)
I originally wanted the copied value to have the same struct type as the
original. But this is difficult to do, and it doesn't really make sense
to do this. It's possible to just let them be different structs even though
they have the same fields. When they are different structs, we lose the
ability to conveniently copy from one to the other (in C, we can copy from
one struct type to another with plain old assignment), but we can still
enumerate the fields and copy that way.

Going slightly further, there is a question of what the result of a
deallocation should actually be. We can make the type of the struct match
exactly, but we might not want to do that. We might want it to be a struct
that doesn't have a tag and only has the fields from the known type that
was deallocated.

# Functions That Consume a Value Zero Times

Some substructal type systems have a way to use a value without counting
that use as consumption. In QTT, this is the zero multiplicity, and Idris 2
uses this to make it so that linear bindings can be used an unlimited
number of times in types.

There are other possible ways that someone might want to use a feature
like this. Consider the `read` operation for arrays. The traditional
presentation in a linear type system is:

    read : MutableArray a {1} -> S64 -> (MutableArray a {1}, a)

But this is awful to use. It is much more convenient to have something
like this instead:

    read : MutableArray a {0} -> S64 -> a

And then we could say:

    xs = newArray(100,Foo)
    read(xs,0)
    read(xs,1)
    read(xs,2)
    freeArray(xs)

Rust and Austral both let users do this. And borrowing works nearly the same
way. It does not count as consumption.

What's odd about these type systems is that they aren't just QTT. We cannot
call `read` again after we call `freeArray`. Austral refers to `xs` after
`freeArray` as being in a "consumed state".

Evidently, these type systems are sound, but it bothers me that I don't see
any way to embed something like this in an ordinary linear type system.
I've thought about trying to use CPS for something like this, but it does
not work. The only thing that really makes sense to me is for the application
of a function to linearly consumed argument to simply remove them from the
context. This implies that we are in an ANF-like setting with a "bind"
construct (instead of "let") that truly sequences everything. We cannot just
move things around. Or we can sometimes, but it's not easy to see when
that kind of thing is allowed.

Maybe, at a high level, we could have two languages. Once of them is a lot
like Haskell. Everything is pure and there is no substructural typing.
But there is another language, a more sequenced one. We need to be able
to lift either into the other, subject to certain constraints. Eventually,
we would just lower everything to the sequenced language. Somehow, an
IO effect needs to fit into this as well.

I think that in the user-facing high-level language, there would only
be one function type that you could use. It would always be the
sequenced one. But then the optimizer would turn some of these into
the nonsequenced functions. And strangely, at the lowest level, we
should end up in the same situation. Only the sequenced ones. 

