# Problem with Nesting Regions

I had been planning on the possibility of a subregion referencing a parent
region. A subregion cannot outlive its parent, and it may contain pointers
to its parent. However, this is trickier than I imagined. I originally
thought that anything it the parent region could be upcasted so that
its type indicated that it was in the subregion. But when the subregion
is writeable, this does not work. With such a system, the parent can
end up pointing into the subregion, and then when the subregion goes
out of scope, the parent region contains dangling pointers. So this
is unsound.

We can fix this by distinguishing the allocate capability from the
write capability. When a new region is introduced, with or without
a parent region, we only start out with the allocate capability.
Like this:

    withRegion : forall (p : Region) (a : Type).
         (forall (r : Region). (p <: r) -> Alloc r -> a@p)
      -> a@p

And we can temporarily gain the write capability by proving that
we do not modify anything that already existed:

    withWrite : forall (r : Region) (a : Type).
         Alloc r
      -> (forall (s : Region). Alloc s -> Write s -> a@s)
      -> a@r

Together, the two of these make it possible to create subregions that we
can write to. But they are too heavily restricted. We have no way to
create pointers from the child region into the parent region. We need
primitives that require the allocation capability but not the write
capability:

    newArray : {r} -> Alloc r -> S64 -> a@r -> Array a @r

This works pretty well for creating objects (user-defined types with
fields), but it doesn't work well for arrays at all. We can create
a new array where every element is set to the same value, but we cannot
do much else. I would like to be able to create an initialized array and
then write elements it one by one. But I'd like to be able to do this
with only the allocate capability because I'm not modifying something
that already exists. It is easy to do this if each type variable has
its own region associated with it:

    swap : {r} -> {s} -> Write r -> S64 -> S64 -> Array@r a@s -> Unit

But this design comes with other costs, so I don't want to pursue it.

Let's motivate this with an example. Suppose that I have am writing an
application that does this:

* Receive JSON requests on a socket
* Decode the json syntax tree into an application-specific type
* Build a request to send this to a data store
* Send the request
* Decode the response
* Respond to the client on the same socket that the request came in on

This is basically a web app but without HTTP framing. Let's say that
the original request is in region `a`. It's just a byte array there.
Then, we push region `b` on top. Region `b` has the syntax tree. This
can reference region `a` (e.g. strings that did not require escape
sequences). And then our application-specific data goes in region `c`,
and it can reference `b` (and transitively `a`) because, again, it's
useful to be able to share strings. Our request to the data store,
in region `d`, likely needs to `c`. But then after being sent,
region `d` is freed. At this point, we might not longer need `a`, `b`,
or `c`. It depends on what information goes into the response to the
client. The response from the database is decoded into region `e`
(which does not reference any other regions). And then we response
to the client and free region `e`.

In this example, all of the data is immutable. Maybe I am not leaning
hard enough into tracking immutability in the type system. What if
object and array types (but not numeric types) included both a base
type and a mutability?

    upcast : (p <: r) -> immutable Foo@p -> immutable Foo@r
    withRegion : forall (p : Region) (a : Type).
         (forall (r : Region). (p <: r) -> Write r -> a@p)
      -> a@p
    swap : {r} -> Write r -> S64 -> S64 -> Array a @r -> Unit

We no longer need to distinguish `Write` and `Alloc`. Now we track
mutability on each object individually. Should we split mutable and
immutable types into different kinds? I would prefer not to.
