# More Thoughts About Language

## Debruijn Indices vs Names

I have been thinking about using debruijn indices for types that get introduced
by lambdas that require universal quantification. But it is difficult to deal
with this syntactically. So I might just give them names and require that
shadowing does not happen. This makes inlining weird, but I can figure that
out later.

## Syntax for Predicates

Predicates are still kind of a pain. It would be nice if I could use
information about the type to decide how to parse the predicate, but type
aliasing would break that. Still, it would be nice. One problem that I am
having is that the predicate `[0]` could be a predicate for a signed integral
type or an unsigned integral type. Maybe I could have `[0x00]` be the one
for unsigned types instead. It's more common to write unsigned numbers with
hexadecimal anyway. And then something like `[Cons,Nil]` or maybe `{Cons,Nil}`
could be the predicate for ADTs.

## Array vs Vector

It might be possible to unify `Array` and `Vector`, but it requires introducing
a "top type" for naturals. Consider:

    Array : Nat -> Type -> Type
    Array 5 S64 // array with 5 elements
    Array ⊤ S64 // array with unknown number of elements
    Array n S64 // array with n elements

This is pretty nice. We cannot do the same thing for `S32` and `Fin` though.
These take totally different refinements, and they behave differently.

## Top Type as Syntactic Sugar

I'm realizing that there are too many problems with the way that I wanted
a "top type" for regions to work:

* Bad interaction with type arguments.
* Prevents some values from being returned from `with` that it should be
  possible to return from `with`.

Perhaps, instead, a less powerful version of this could be implemented as a
something that only appears in the type signatures of functions. Effectively,
it would require that the region be inferred from a value argument (a single
value argument, not multiple arguments). From the outside, the region would be
hidden, but from the inside, it would be visible. I think this is the way
forward.
