# Low-Level PL Sizes for Option

On 2024-07-19, I suggested that there be a fixed number of sizes
for types:

* 1
* 2
* 3
* 4
* 6
* 8
* 12
* 16
* 20
* 24
* 32
* 64

If things are done this way, then we need the unboxed `Option`
type to exist as:

    struct Option[1] : Type1 -> Type2 where
      Some : forall (a : Type1). a -> Option[1] a
      None : forall (a : Type1). Option[1] a
    ...
    struct Option[32] : Type32 -> Type64 where
      Some : forall (a : Type32). a -> Option[32] a
      None : forall (a : Type32). Option[32] a

And we are missing `Option[64]` entirely. This leads to problems when
we try to specialize functions written in a higher-level language. So what
if we did this instead:

    box Option[32] : Type32 -> Type4 where
      Some : forall (a : Type32). a -> Option[32] a
      None : forall (a : Type32). Option[32] a
    box Option[64] : Type64 -> Type4 where
      Some : forall (a : Type64). a -> Option[64] a
      None : forall (a : Type64). Option[64] a

Now the big ones get boxed. We don't technically need to do this for the
option with a 32-bit element, but it ends up saving space to do this.
(The other strategy wasted 255 bits in the `Some` constructor). A disadvantage
of this approach is that it becomes more difficult to reason about allocation
in the high-level language. Before, when we saw `Some`, we were certain that
it wasn't going to allocate something on the heap. We actually still get this
guarantee for `None` (since it's a nullary data constructor), but we have lost
it for `Some`. I'm not certain what else can be done though.

It could be some bizarre kind of phony unboxed type. Maybe it's reference
counted instead of the normal mechanism for GC. Then we would at least get
predictable cleanup. But that would be awful to implement.

We could also (and this is such a bizarre idea) have the value for `Option[32]`
and `Option[64]` be only 4 bytes, but it's a pointer to a heap-like area
where everything there has an RC of 1. So when you share a `Some[64]`, it
would make a copy of it. This is a strange system that appears to have
the downsides of both heap allocation (indirection, managing liveliness)
and stack allocation (duplication of content). However, it comes with
one advantage: predictable memory consumption. I'm still not convinced
that this is actually a good idea though.

A more simple solution is this:

    struct Option[64] : Type64 -> Type0 where
      None : forall (a : Type64). Option[64] a
    some : forall (a : Type64). a -> Option[64] a
    some(x) = crash("Sorry, this does not work")

But it's unsatisfying. I guess the problem is that I want a fixed number of
sizes, and an unboxed `Option` type constructor is fundamentally at odds with
this goal. We can nest `Option` inside of itself 100 times in the high-level
language, and that needs to turn into something in the low-level language.
But how can it turn into anything that both:

1. Has a size that is on my list of sizes?
2. Is not allocated on a heap?

This isn't just a problem for `Option`. It will show up in every tuple type.
One restriction that resolves this is disallowing unboxed types from having
polymorphic fields. I don't love this solution, but it does work. If we
do this, then our `Option` type in the high-level language must be boxed.
The compiler can perform optimizations to turn this into better forms when
appropriate. For example, we might have a type `OptionU8` that is represented
by two bytes. Consider this specialization of lookup:

    lookup : Map a -> Key -> Option a
    lookupU8 : Map U8 -> Key -> OptionU8

It's kind of difficult to do this though. Maybe we could have an `Option` type
constructor, but it just cannot be used to instantiate a type variable. It
could show up as a field in a boxed type, and it can be used as a function
argument or return type. The lowerings of the `lookup` function wouldn't need
to return a single value that is less than or equal to 64 bytes. The could
return multiple values. Even the `lookup[64]` specialization would just be
returning a tag byte and a 64-byte payload.

But we cannot put `Option` itself in a map. And we cannot use an unboxed tuple
type as a map element. These types (type constructors) do not have sizes.
So we split our type universe for the high-level language:

    CompositeType
    Type
    S64 : Type
    Bool : Type
    Map : Type -> Type
    Array : Type -> Type
    Coordinate : Type
    Option : Type -> CompositeType
    Either : Type -> Type -> CompositeType
    Tuple2 : Type -> Type -> CompositeType
    Tuple3 : Type -> Type -> Type -> CompositeType

This ends up working fine because it's not common to want to store any of the
composite types in an array, a map, etc.

It might be possible to loosen some of the restrictions on composite types.
For example, we should be able to nest them in one another. We still cannot
have a type variable that is a composite type, but it is nice to be able
to write this:

    statefulTraversal : (a -> b -> Option (a,b)) -> a -> [b] -> Option (a,[b])

Fold over the list with the ability to short circuit at any time, and return
the new list along with the final state. 
