# Two Ways to Mutate Arrays

Consider this system:

    Array        : Type -> Type
    Initializer  : Type -> Type
    MutableArray : Type -> Type
    initializer  : S64 -> a -> Initializer a {1}
    mutableArray : S64 -> a -> MutableArray a
    writeI       : Initializer a {1} -> S64 -> a -> Initializer a {1}
    writeM       : MutableArray a -> S64 a -> Unit
    freeze       : Initializer a {1} -> Array a

An `Initializer` is consumed linearly everywhere, and it can be frozen.
A `MutableArray`, on the other hand, is more like what people think of in
languages that do not have substructural type systems. We also can introduce
a bizarre variant of function application:

    apM2I : (MutableArray a -> Unit) -> Initializer a {1} -> Initializer a {1}

But we cannot ever inline this kind of function application. Still, it helps
tremendously with sharing code. We do not want a system that requires us
to write two copies of every kind of function that mutates arrays
(e.g. `permute`, `reverse`). We could instead make this an entirely separate
class of function:

    reverse : Unit =>{ArrayUpdate a} Unit

But I don't like that at all. Our bizarre variant of function application
can be understood as a kind of borrow.

# Tracking Mutability

One decision that has to be made when using this kind of system is whether
or not to allow mutable types to appear as type variables. Or whether to
distinguish mutable types from immutable types at all in the type system.
I would prefer to not distinguish them. But to make concurrency safe, we need
to prohibit mutable values from a parent thread from being accessed in a
child thread. And how can we know which values are mutable? By their types?
Whether or not a type is mutable might depend on how its type variables
have been instantiated. For example `Map (Array S64)` is immutable all the
way down but `Map (MutableArray S64)` has mutable data at the leaves.

One option is to just split mutable data and immutable data into separate
universes. This would mean that type variables could not be instantiated
with mutable types. That doesn't work well for mutable maps, where mutable
element types are sometimes desireable. Also, it's not great for arrays
either. Consider something like an in-place `permute`:

    permute : MutableArray a -> Array S64 -> Unit

What is the kind of type `a`? We would like for this to work with both
mutable and immutable element types. There is no difference between the
implementations. This suggests that a single kind would be better.

A simple option is to just perform a check at run time. I'm not planning
on erasing type variables, so all the information would be there. We could
just check to see if anything argument of the forked function had a type
that implied that it might contain mutable data. Notably, we do not have
to trace the arguments themselves.

This is not a bad option. One thing worth considering is whether or not
there are other situations where we really care about ensure that a value
is immutable. Consider an operation like `map`:

    map : (a -> b) -> Array a -> Array b

We really don't want the callback to modify its `a` value, but if it's
a mutable type, this behavior is fair game. Effectively, we lose something
that GHC's system has: the ability to use mutable data in such a way that
the data cannot be modified. We may be able to get this back if we reintroduce
region capabilities:

    map : {r} -> {s} -> Write s -> (a@r -> b@s) -> Array a @r -> Array b @s

Here, we do not have the `Write` capability for region `r`. Nevermind.
This does not work. The calling context could just close over the `Write`
capability for `r`. So let's get rid of the `Write` capability for `s`
and replace it with an allocate capability:

    map : {r} -> {s} -> Alloc s -> (a@r -> b@s) -> Array a @r -> Array b @s

Although it would probably be nice if the type system paired up the allocate
capability with the region's introduction:

    map : Function{r, s+}(a@r -> b@s, Array a @r)(Array b @s)

This is not bad.

# Interaction With Regions

Part of why I like tracking mutability in object types is that it makes it
so that we do not have to deal with region capabilities. We still might
want to have the allocate capability, but the write capability is unneeded.
Similarly, the antiwrite capability (proof that the region is frozen) is
also unneeded. This means that I could get rid of all of the goofy
join-point-like constructs that I had been thinking about.

# Better Reuse for Permute

Thinking about several variants:

    permuteA : Function{r ,s }(MutableArray a @r, Array S64 @s)(Unit)
    permuteB : Function{r+,s }(       Array a @r, Array S64 @s)(Array a @r)
    permuteC : Function{r ,s }(*Initializer a @r, Array S64 @s)(*Initializer a @r)
    permuteD : Function{r ,s }(MutableArray a @r, MutableArray S64 @s)(Unit)
    permuteE : Function{r+,s }(       Array a @r, MutableArray S64 @s)(Array a @r)
    permuteF : Function{r ,s }(*Initializer a @r, MutableArray S64 @s)(*Initializer a @r)

The function returning a newly allocated array is easily derived:

    permuteB(vals, idxs):
      tmp1 = clone(vals)
      tmp2 = permuteC(vals, idxs)
      tmp3 = freeze(tmp2)
      return(tmp3)

The variants accepting a mutable array of indices are tricky. We could do
this:

    permuteD{r,s}(vals,idxs):
      t = region
      tmp = makeImmutableCopy{t+}(idxs)
      permuteA{r,t}(vals,tmp)

But this makes a copy of the indices, which is not smart. (Even though the
copy does get freed promptly.)

The variants that require a `MutableArray` of indices are probably not terribly
useful. The main reason that someone might want to do that is to reuse memory.
But we can already reuse memory with regions. So someone could, in theory,
allocate a region for the array of indices, build the array of indices,
freeze it, use it, and then release the region. A subsequent attempt to
do the same thing would end up using the same memory.

So I think it's down to `permuteA` and `permuteC`. And of these two, I suspect
that `permuteC` is more useful in practice. Usually when we have a long-lived
permanently mutable array, we are just doing simple operations on it: read
and write. But not always. For example, the mutable arrays that show up in
mutable B trees require scanning a branch's keys to look for the first key
that is greater than the needle.
