# Decoding JSON with Regions

Here is a possible type signature for a "decode json" function:

    decode : Function{Ancestor src dst}(Handle dst, Array U8 @src)(Option (Value @dst)) using {src,dst}

Requiring that the `src` region is an ancestor of `dst` makes it possible
for the result to reference slices of the argument array. We want to do
this whenever a JSON string does not use escape sequences.

# Rethinking Primitives for Region Stacks

The way I have previously thought about doing all of this, we would lose
the `src` capability when we created `dst`. But we could recover it by
lifting a `src`-requiring function calls into a `dst`-available context.
This is a consequence of thinking about capabilities like the paper
Linear Regions Are All You Need does. In that paper, region capabilities
are threaded linearly through a program. This means that capabilities
to ancestor regions are made available through their children. This
approach leads to an undesirable outcome: a parent region cannot have
more than one child. Regions form a stack, which the paper is very
clear about.

I don't like the system that results from following the paper. In the
json-decoding example, I like having the `src` and `dst` capabilities
present at the same time. So I need to do something different.
How about this (requires linear types):

    new       : Function()(exists r. Handle r) {+r}
    newChild  : Function()(exists r. Handle r, Parent p r {1}, Ancestor p r) {+r,p}
    free      : Function(Handle r)() {-r}
    freeChild : Function(Handle r, Parent p r {1})() {-r,p}
    upcast    : Ancestor p c -> a@p -> a@c

We cannot call `free` on a region introduced by `newChild` because our
`Parent` proof will not get consumed linearly. And we cannot free the
parent region before we free the child region because the parent capability
must be in scope when the child capability gets freed.

Wait. What if we just remove the `Parent` proof:

    new       : Function()(exists r. Handle r) {+r}
    newChild  : Function()(exists r. Handle r, Ancestor p r) {+r,p}
    free      : Function(Handle r)() {-r}
    freeChild : Function(Handle r)() {-r,p}
    upcast    : Ancestor p c -> a@p -> a@c

We still cannot perform an out-of-order free with `freeChild` because the
parent capability still must be present in the capability set effect when
the child is freed. But if we free the parent and child both with `free`,
we can free them in the wrong order. So we need proofs, but we don't
actually have to remove the parent region from the context: 

    new       : Function()(exists r. Handle r, Root r) {+r}
    newChild  : Function()(exists r. Handle r, Parent p r, Ancestor p r) {+r,p}
    free      : Function(Handle r, Root r)() {-r}
    freeChild : Function(Handle r, Parent p r)() {-r,p}
    upcast    : Ancestor p c -> a@p -> a@c

This is perfect.

# Implicit Arguments 

All of these types have the property that any two inhabitants are equal
to one another:

* `Handle`
* `Ancestor` (may want to call this `<:` like the subtype operator)
* `Parent`
* `Root`

I should support passing these around implicitly in the source language.

# Type of More Functions

Here are some more type signatures:

    reverse     : Function{Hnd r}(Array a @s0)(Array a @r) {s0,r}
    append      : Function{Hnd r}(Array a @s0, Array a @s1)(Array a @r) {s0,s1,r}
    lookup      : Function       (Map a @s0, U64)(a) {s0}
    decodeUtf8  : Function       (Array U8 @r)(Option (String@r)) {r}
    decodeAscii : Function       (Array U8 @r)(Option (String[0..127]@r)) {r}

In the source language, I would like for all of the types named `s0`, `s1`, etc.
to be omitted. I don't want to see them in the capability set or attached to the
function. Compare these two types of `append`:

    append : Function{Hnd r}(Array a @s0, Array a @s1)(Array a @r) {s0,s1,r}
    append : Function{Hnd r}(Array a, Array a)(Array a @r) {r}

We may infer the first type from the second type. Any time we have an argument
whose region has no relationship to any other region in the type signature
(including the result region), we should be able to use this shorthand syntax.
A few more:

    // encode json, no relationship between src and dst regions
    encode : Function(Handle r, Value)(String @r) {r}
