# Back From Linear Types

I thought about Linear Types again on 2024-04-15, but I've convinced
myself that they are not the answer to my problem.

# Stack Allocation Without Explicit Tracking

On 2024-02-27, I looked at a GC strategy that uses types at compile time
to decide when objects can be allocated on the stack. And then, in the same
entry, I went a little further and explored a more complicated
"optimistically reclaim memory" strategy.

I am reminded of Tofte and Talpin's work. The paper
Linear Regions Are All You Need, which builds on their work, includes this
useful insight:

> The initial design of Cyclone was based upon the region type system of
> Tofte and Talpin [2]. Data are allocated within lexically-scoped regions and
> all of the objects in a region are deallocated at the end of the region’s scope.
> Unfortunately, the last-in-first-out (LIFO) lifetimes of lexically-scoped regions
> place severe restrictions on when data can be effectively reclaimed, and we found
> many programs that resulted in (unbounded) leaks when compared to a garbage
> collected implementation.

The solution that the authors offer is non-lexically-scoped regions. But what
about something else entirely? We can organize memory as a bunch of regions,
and regions can refer to other regions, but there cannot be cycles. So the
regions form a acyclic graph. The normal behavior of a function is to just
bump allocate into a region. But then what do we do when it returns. There
are two easy cases: nothing escapes (discard the regions) and everything
escapes (keep the region live, not a leak). The hard case is when some
allocated memory is returned but not all of it. One thing that can help
the hard case is having per-type regions for allocations. It's possible
(maybe even likely) that all allocations of a certain type are non-escaping.
But for the hard case, we need some kind of tracing to compact things
by copying what's live and discarding what's unreachable. This is getting
too complicated. I might revisit this later.

# Mutation Without Second-Class Values

I thought of a way to handle mutation that doesn't involve linear types
or second-class values. But it does use an effects system with a stack
of effects. The idea is to introduce a reader-like effect whose "environment"
type is something mutable. This effect doesn't work like reader at all.
Here is an example:

    foo : Function{MutateArrayOf Person + Pure}(Int,Int,Person)(Unit)
    foo = function(x,y,p):
      write(x,p)
      write(y,p)
      pure Unit

The mutable array is not explicitly referenced. This effect can be stacked
to provide access to multiple arrays:

    modifyBoth : Function{MutateArrayOf Person + MutateArrayOf Person + Pure}(...)(...)

And we have a "no aliasing" guarantee. The biggest drawback to this approach is
that it requires preserving the mutation effect all the way down to the lowest
level. There might be some opportunity to combine multiple mutation effects
into a single effect. But I'm not totally sure. This feels very simple compared
to the alternatives I have explored recently.
