# Back to Linear Types

Playing around with second-class values between 2024-03-04 and now has been
fun, but I'm getting to the point where they are starting to lose the value
that I hoped they would have. My intent was to use second-class values for
two purposes:

1. Scoping mutation to make freeze safe
2. Ensuring that certain values were allocated on the stack. Supporting
   deep stack allocation.

To get (1) to work, I had to introduce primitives that take lambda arguments.
I was willing to do that. And to get (2) to work in a way that doesn't create
an awful user experience, I would've have to remove a restriction that the
Gentrification paper imposes (see 2024-04-14). I wasn't willing to do this.
Without taking this extra step, it's only possible to have shallow stack
allocation. That is, an array can be stack allocated, but its elements
cannot live on the stack.

This is a disappointing result. However, it has helped convinced me that
any sound approach to mutation (with freezing) will require a scoping
operator that takes a function argument. Since I'm now willing to conceed
this, I want to look at Linear Types again. Here's the operator for creating
mutable arrays from the Linear Haskell paper:

    data Unrestricted a where { Unrestricted :: a -> Unrestricted a }
    newMArray :: Int -> (MArray a -o Unrestricted b) -o b
    freeze :: MArray a -o Unrestricted (Array a)

This relies heavily on the `Unrestricted` data type. Constructing an
`Unrestricted` looks like this:

    -- Notice the non-linear consumption of the argument
    makeUnrestricted :: a -> Unrestricted a

So `freeze` is special because it builds an `Unrestricted` value but only
consumes its argument linearly. Pair construction looks like this:

    makePair : a -o b -o Pair a b

In LH, results never have consumption annotations. Interestingly, this is
similar to the way that the type system from the Gentrification paper works.
LH's formulation of `newMArray` is interesting. What if we added this:
 
    discard :: MArray a -o Unit
    -- or possibly instead
    discard :: MArray a -o Unrestricted Unit

I think this is fine. Although we might want to just weaken the type system
to be affine instead of linear. Then we could discard the array without
having to call a special function that sequences things unnecessarily.

Do we actually want different types for mutable and immutable arrays?
I think that we have to have them. Otherwise, we could take an immutable
array and pass it to a function that consumes an array linearly, and
that function could mutate it. So we do need a mutable array type.

Tweag has a blog post on [Destination Passing Style](https://www.tweag.io/blog/2020-11-11-linear-dps/)
that includes a bothersome system:

    alloc :: Int -> (DArray a ⊸ ()) ⊸ Array a
    copyArray :: Array a -> DArray a ⊸ ()

Things that return unit always feel wrong to me. The blog post gives an
example of how these can be used:

    copyArray' :: Array a -> Array a
    copyArray' a = alloc (length a) (\d -> copyArray a d)

However, we may also write:

    copyArray' :: Array a -> Array a
    copyArray' a = alloc (length a)
      (\d -> case copyArray a d of
        () -> ()
      )

And this should also satisfy the typechecker. Maybe my gripe with LH is that
many functions that, for many types, linear consumption doesn't really mean
anything. For example, we can take any function that consumes `List Int` in
a nonlinear fashion and make it linear by wrapping it:

    cloneList :: List Int -o Unrestricted (List Int)
    myNonLinearConsumer :: List Int -> Foo
    myLinearConsumer :: List Int -o List Int
    myLinearConsumer x = case cloneList x of
      Unrestricted y -> myNonLinearConsumer y

So linearity is really only meaningful when applied to abstract types. This
includes types like `MArray` that are not ADTs. It also includes abstract
types from module signatures.

Let's revisit the DPS example. What if we used something opaque instead
of unit:

    alloc :: Int -> (DArray a ⊸ Witness) ⊸ Array a
    copyArray :: Array a -> DArray a ⊸ Witness

This doesn't seem as bad because it's not possible to case on `Witness`.
So now scrutinee doesn't drive evaluation. Is it possible to redo `newMArray`
in a similar way? Here's one approach:

    newMArray :: Int -> (MArray a -o MArray a) -o Array a

This is less powerful, and it merges `freeze` and `newMArray` into a single
operation. We not longer have the ability to return additional information.
How about this:

    newMArray :: Int -> (MArray a -o (MArray a, b)) -o (Array a, b)

This is more expressive. Interestingly, we are able to instantiate
`b` to `MArray` and mutate an additional array while we are mutating the
one brought into scope in the callback. And this is sound.
