# Notes from Working on Posix Bindings

Misc notes:

* I could not find any examples of building an object file that will later
  be statically linked against musl libc. All the examples describe building
  an executable.
* Musl's makefile creates one object file (with an `.lo` extension) for each
  function 
* It is possible to prefix every symbol in musl. Just give `objcopy` the
  `--prefix-symbols` flag. I had to omit the entire `complex` directory because
  it refers to symbols that are not part of musl. But everything else was
  self-contained. Use something like this:
  `find obj/ -name '*.lo' -exec objcopy --prefix-symbols musl_ {} new/{}`
* It was surprising to me how many function calls we have to go through
  just to call something simple like `read`, which directly wraps a syscall
  and does not need to clean up any of the error codes. This has to do with
  Posix thread cancelation.
* It turns out that glibc actually had code that was easier to adapt for
  my purpose. If you search through the codebase for `internal_syscall`,
  there are several macros in a header file. Just copy these and the macros
  they depend on (which are all in the same file), and you can make syscalls.
  This does not move the error code into the global `errno` variable. It also
  doesn't handle thread cancelation correctly.

# Posix Thread Cancelation

I learned about Posix thread cancelation while I was working on this. I've
never needed this before, so I've never had to think about it. Now that I've
learned about it, I can say that it's a dumpster fire. It's possible to use
it correctly and avoid leaking resources, but I have a hard time believing
that most uses are correct. The problem is not specific to Posix. It's the
entire model, which is similar to GHC's (similarly hard to use) mechanism
for throwing exceptions to target threads. All the same problems are there:
masking exceptions, possible file descriptor leaks, and registering file
descriptors for cleanup.

It's a little easier with Posix because GHC has cancelation points
(described as "interruptibility") at all allocation sites by default,
which is basically everywhere. By constrast, Posix defaults
every thread's cancelation state to `PTHREAD_CANCEL_DEFERRED`, which means
that you don't have to worry about a thread being canceled in nearly as
many places.

This strategy is terrible. It's easier to reason about programs when you
assume that something from the outside cannot just terminate them at will.
If it should be possible to stop a thread from the outside, the thread
should periodically poll some kind of shared memory to decide if it needs to
keep running. This requires that the cancelable function be designed with
cancelation in mind, but you already end up having to do that with the
cancel/throw approaches used by Posix and by GHC.

# Example of Returning a Small Struct

In the runtime for lith, I've been trying to wrap the `read` syscall.
In my variant, the function is also responsible for allocating the memory,
so it needs to return an array of bytes (with the length) or an error code.
I ended up settling on this return type:

    struct result_errno_array_u8 {
      // Set payload to null to indicate error code.
      uint8_t* payload;
      int32_t length_or_error_code;
    };

I previously had a struct that required 24 bytes. Squeezin this into
16 bytes makes it possible to use the calling convention that returns
the two struct members into RAX and RDX instead of XMM0 and XMM1. This
results in the data being shuffled around less to get everything into
place. Additionally, the call site looks better. For example:

    10f2:	e8 39 01 00 00       	call   1230 <lith_read>
    10f7:	48 85 c0             	test   %rax,%rax
    10fa:	75 21                	jne    111d <main+0x9d>
    10fc:	89 d6                	mov    %edx,%esi

We scrutinize the result right after calling the `read` wrapper
(named `lith_read`). This scrutiny is a simple `test` of `RAX` against
itself to check whether or not it is the null pointer. If it's not,
the program is able to use `EDX` as the array length. (The `MOV` is
in preparation for a call to `printf`).

In a prior iteration, I had defined the struct in such a way that it
had a 64-bit pointer and two 32-bit integers. This formulation resulted
in the same calling convention, but one of the 32-bit integers was
shifted into place and combined with the other one.

# Small Struct Conclusions

I think that it is worth specializing all variants of the `result`
data type. In most cases, it is possible to pack this into two words.
It is possible for at least these:

* `Result U(8|16|32|64) U(8|16|32|64)`
* `Result U(8|16|32|64) (Array X)`
* `Result U(8|16|32|64) BoxedType`
* `Result BoxedType BoxedType`

This is going to cause problems for boxed types since there are an
infinite number of them. One solution is to create a "result type" struct
for every function that returns a `Result`. I don't like this. I wish
that it were possible to use untagged structs, but C does not let you
do this. Actually, it turns out that there is a way:

    struct { int x, y; } foo(void) {
      typeof(foo()) ret;
      ret.x = 1;
      ret.y = 10;
      return ret;
    }

And we can do the same thing at call sites. Wild.
