# More Thoughts About CPSed Linear Types

If we have a function `foo`:

    foo : (A {1} => B {1}) => C {1}

Then, what types of functions can we pass it as an argument:

    A {1} => B {1}
    A {1} => B {*}

Why is the second one allowed? What does `foo` do with the result of the
function that requires that its argument be consumed exactly once? It
must consume it exactly once. But it's ok to for the argument function
to return a value with no restrictions. In other words, the annotation
clarifies what happens to the function's result. It's not a property
of the function itself. We can see this more clearly if we rewrite
this:

    foo : (forall r. (B {1} -> r) -> A {1} -> r) => C {1}

# Mutation and Linear Types

One huge difference between linear types and uniqueness types is that linear
types require the user to distinguish between mutable and immutable types
in some way other than just the linearity annotation.

    new : (Int, a) => MutableArray a {1}
    write : (MutableArray a {1}, Int, a) => MutableArray a {1}
    freeze : MutableArray a {1} => Array a

After thinking about uniquness types for a while, I became convinced that
uniqueness polymorphism was not a good idea. I think the same is true of
linearity polymorphism. Let's think about several variants of lists:

    ImmutableList a = Cons a (ImmutableList a) | Nil
    MutableList1 a = Cons a (mut MutableList1 a){1} | Nil
    MutableList2 a = Cons a{1} (mut MutableList1 a){1} | Nil

The first mutable list type has a mutable spine. The second one has a mutable
spine and mutable elements. The ordinary `ImmutableList` always has an
immutable spine, but the head could be mutable depending on how it was
allocated.

This formulation has a notable drawback. Uniqueness types make it possible
to freeze a data structure with an upcast (a no-op). When you bolt mutation
onto a linear type system, you lose this. Freezing a mutable array (shallow)
works fine, but we cannot perform any deep freezes. The types are just not
compatible. We cannot cast a `mut` type to an immutable type. This seems
bad, but it's not all bad:

* Disadvantage: Cannot deep freeze.
* Advantage: The freezes that do happen are explicit in the code. The runtime
  (in particular, the automatic memory management system) can use this
  information.
