# More About Regions

I looked at Linear Regions Are All You Need again yesterday. The paper
describes a source language and a target language, both of which are intended
for dealing with regions. It's the target language that I am interested in.
Here are the types of the import primitives. I'm leaving out the linearity
annotations, but here's the gist:

* capabilities are always consumed linearly
* handles and references are consumed nonlinearly (unrestrictedly)

Here are the types:

    newrgn  : unit -> ∃r. (cap r, hnd r)
    freergn : (cap r, hnd r) -> unit
    new     : (cap r, hnd r, a) -> (cap r, ref r a)
    read    : (cap r, ref r a) -> (cap r, a)
    write   : (cap r, ref r a, a) -> cap r

My thoughts:

* Breaking the capability and the handle apart is smart. The capability
  has no representation at runtime. One interpretation of this system is
  that the handle grants the additional capability of allocating.
* This uses traditional references and does not use linearity or uniqueness
  for in-place updates.
* Threading the capability through every function is tedious. My opinion is
  that it makes this unusable as a user-facing language. The authors
  acknowledge this tedium: "Walker and Watkins... provide a primitive,
  similar to `letregion`, that allows a capability to be temporarily treated
  as unrestricted for convenience's sake. We have shown that no such primitive
  is needed."
* In the paper, the source calculus includes primitives that allow a
  "child region" (my term, not described this way in the paper) to
  refer to objects in a "parent region". This is accomplished by `letRgn`,
  `coerceRgn`, `reflSub`, and `transSub`. The translations of `letRgn`
  and `coerceRgn`, given in section 4, are both impenetrable to me.
  But being able to do this useful.

I have considered a variation on this system. What if we do away with `freergn`
and we make the consumption of capabilities nonlinear? Now the capability does
not have to be threaded through as a return value. This convenience comes at
a cost:

* We cannot pack regions (hiding the existential) because that would make it
  difficult (or maybe impossible) for the compiler to figure out when they
  go out of scope.  
* Relatedly, we cannot return existentials from user-defined functions.
  This restriction serves the same purpose. That is, a function cannot
  create a region and then return it. This is reasonable.
* We can pass regions to as arguments to functions but not to join points.
  Again, this is related to making it simple to track the lifetimes of
  regions. It might be possible to lift this restriction. I am not certain
  that it is even useful to do this kind of thing though.
