# Implicit Type Equalities

A problem with implicit type equality is that it makes dependencies
less clear. We cannot hoist an expression upward if it relies on a type
equality that came into scope above itself.

Ergonomically, implicit type equalities are superior. Users do not want
to manually coerce types.

Maybe the solution is to say that type equalities only come into scope
implicitly as the result of scrutinee. There is no reason to hoist an
expression above a site of scrutinee anyway.

# More Thoughts About Natural Numbers

I was thinking about the example from 2024-10-08, and I started
thinking about how a finite number is just syntactic sugar around a
pair of naturals that sum to something else:

    Fin n
    ===
    exists i j. i + j + 1 = n

To pack a natural `i` into a `Fin`, we have:

    packFin : (n : Nat, i : Nat, j : Nat){i + j + 1 = n}(Fin n)

Seen this way, it's possible to rewrite the example in a way that avoids
the `casefin` keyword:

    fn enumerate{r : Region, n : Nat}[r](Handle r)(Array n i32 @r)
    as (h): 
      loop*(dst : Array n i32 @r, i : Nat, j : Nat){i + j + 1 = n}:
        value : i32 = natToI32(i)
        ix = packFin(n,i,j)
        dstNext : Array n i32 @r = array.write{r,n,i32}(dst,ix,value)
        casenat i:
          0: return dst
          1+pred: jump loop(dstNext, pred, j+1)
      casenat n:
        0:
          e : Array 0 i32 @R0 = array.empty{i32}()
          return e
        1+k:
          initDst : Array n i32 @r = array.new{r,n,i32}(h,i32(0))
          jump loop(initDst,k,0)

The value `j` is never actually needed at run time. But we use it as evidence
that `i < n`. This makes other strategies a little easier as well. The
allocation strategy I'm thinking of has nearly zero cost for zero-length
arrays. So we might should unconditionally allocate the array:

    fn enumerate{r : Region, n : Nat}[r](Handle r)(Array n i32 @r)
    as (h): 
      loop*(dst : Array n i32 @r, i : Nat):
        caseNatCmp n i:
          Finite (ix : Fin n):
            value : i32 = natToI32(i)
            dstNext : Array n i32 @r = array.write{r,n,i32}(dst,ix,value)
            j = i + 1
            jump loop(dstNext, j)
          None: return dst
      initDst : Array n i32 @r = array.new{r,n,i32}(h,i32(0))
      jump loop(initDst,0)

There aren't even types that depend on `i` above, so it could be done with
a nondependent type. It does have to be nonnegative, but there are ways to
deal with that.

# Proving Properties of Half of a Number

I started thinking again about how to prove this:

    x >= 1 ==> floor(x / 2) < x

It's not hard to prove this, but it requires considering the case
where x=1 separately from the other cases. You have to split the
problem into two problems. And I don't really want to deal with proving
things like this in a programming language.

Unfortunately, this proof is needed when searching through a sorted
array. We need to keep dividing the array into halves, but we have
to stop doing this once the size of the array under consideration
gets down to zero. One (confusing) approach is:

    // Result is floor((p+1) / 2)
    halfOfSucc : Function(p : Nat)(Fin (p+1))

Or with type equalities:

    halfOfNonZero : Function(n : Nat, p : Nat){n = p + 1}(Fin n)

This is a tiny bit more clear, but it's still awful to use.

# Conclusion

I have to stop thinking about fancy things with type-level natural numbers.
It's a dead end. It's possible to get a lot of mileage with a simple approach.
I need to just focus on that. And then all the stuff that requires complicated
proofs can just get bounds checking instead.
