# More Thoughts About Automatic Memory Management

In yesterday's entry (2023-12-13), I described two common object-use patterns:

1. Non-escaping (e.g. allocations of environment-like types that are then
   passed to functions)
2. Guaranteed escaping (e.g. parsing into a syntax tree)

Non-escaping allocations can be done on the stack. Guaranteed-escaping
allocations can possibly be optimized by reclaiming an entire region.
For example, let's say that we have:

    type Geo = Geo { lat : s64 , lon : s64 }
    function decodeJsonToGeo(content : [u8]) => [Geo] {
      syntaxTree : JVal = decodeJson(content)
      geos = parseManyGeo(syntaxTree)
      geos
    }

The function `decodeJson` returns everything that it allocates, and none
of its allocations escape the function. This is a specific combination
of conditions, but it means that, before calling `decodeJson`, we can
point the bump allocator at a new special region of memory, and then
after `parseManyGeo` completes, we can free the region. We do not need
a special copy of `decodeJson` for this optimization. Its lowering just
needs to do bump allocation as usual.

There are many situations where this kind of analysis does not work.
In some functions, we allocate a bunch of stuff and then returns an object
that contains some, but not all, of it. We cannot allocate into a region
in this case. By doing that, we could exhaust memory when only a small number
of objects were live.

I think that I'm slowing working my way toward the ideas in the ASAP paper,
but I still don't really have a good intuition for how it behaves. It seems
like you have to periodically trace using the stack as roots, but you probably
only need to use part of the stack. Maybe we could only trigger GC at allocation
points when the size of a block was exceeded. Then if we used sufficiently
large blocks, ASAP would degrade to a traditional collector. But it might
be a little better than a traditional because it would have a better idea
of what actually needed to be traced.

I'm not sure whether or not ASAP is compatible with the region-reclamation
trick that I described earlier. I need to figure that out. I also am not
sure if ASAP can be combined with a referrence counting scheme.

Also, I'm wondering how ASAP works when memory is shared in a multithreaded
setting. In this situation, multiple threads might scan the same parts of
the heap to check liveliness. But how do you decide when it is really dead?

Section 2.4.3 of Practical Static Memory Management does a pretty good job
explaining how ASAP/CLEAN behaves at runtime. Between two program points
P1 and P2, it finds the matter and the antimatter. Both of these sets
overapproximate. Matter is everything that may be accessed after P2.
Antimatter is everything that may be accessed after P1 but not after P2
(that is, it's only possible that it is accessed after P1, not certain).
CLEAN scans the matter first and marks everything that is reachable. Then
it scans the antimatter (the set of things that may have become unreachable)
and frees things that were in fact not marked as reachable. One crucial
optimization that section 2.4.3 points out is that you can reduce the
amount of matter to consider by only considering matter that might alias
with antimatter.

Scanning twice is unfortunate. Cheney-style collection only requires scanning
what is live. But it's interesting that CLEAN performs something more like
a miniscan. I wonder if CLEAN could be delayed so that the program points
could be arbitrarily far from one another. Then, at runtime, we would need
to build the matter and antimatter sets and do the scans. But the scans
would be much less frequent.

It would also be nice if some kind statically determined bulk deallocate
were possible. Let's go back to this example but with ASAP access annotations:

    type Geo = Geo { lat : s64 , lon : s64 }
    function decodeJsonToGeo(content : [u8]) => [Geo] {
      // P0: null
      syntaxTree : JVal = decodeJson(content)
      // P1: syntaxTree{*} (wild path)
      geos = parseManyGeo(syntaxTree)
      // P2: geos
      geos
    }

We do not track accesses of `content` since it could be used again by the caller.
At P2, `syntaxTree` becomes unreachable. It's not just in the "possible antimatter"
set. It's in the "certainly antimatter" set. If we perform our analysis between
program points P1 and P2, we get:

* Matter: `geos`
* Antimatter: `syntaxTree{*}`

Knowing this, there might be some way to allocate `syntaxTree` in a region so that
it can be deallocated in bulk. I'm not certain whether or not this actually works
though. I think we might be able to reuse the existing analysis for this purpose.
It's not clear though. Having to scan `syntaxTree` to find everything that needs
to be freed is silly though.

The ASAP paper talks about Heap and Stack as arguments to a "reachable locations"
function. What if we had multiple heaps as an explicit construct? Then:

    type Geo = Geo { lat : s64 , lon : s64 }
    // All non-text values are in h2.
    function decodeJson{h1,h2}(content : [u8]{h1}) => JVal{(ArrElements.Index{h2=>h2})*,(ObjMembers.Index.Value{h2=>h2})*,ObjMembers.Index.Key{h2=>h1,h2},String{h2=>h1,h2}}
    function decodeJsonToGeo{h}(content : [u8]) => [Geo] {
      declare myRegion
      // We pass decodeJson its own heap for allocation
      syntaxTree : JVal = decodeJson{h,myRegion}(content)
      geos = parseManyGeo(syntaxTree)
      // myRegion and syntaxTree become unreachable here. Since the region
      // is unreachable, we can reclaim the whole thing without scanning it.
      geos
    }

I don't know how I feel about this. This requires pairing every projection
(and by extension, every path) with a heap. This is a considerable complication.
A more simple alternative is to do something like this:

    // result object may have references to both heaps
    function decodeJson{h1,h2}(content : [u8]{h1}) => JVal{h1,h2}
    function decodeJsonToGeo{h}(content : [u8]{h}) => [Geo] {
      declare myRegion
      syntaxTree : JVal = decodeJson{h,myRegion}(content)
      geos = parseManyGeo{h,myRegion}(syntaxTree)
      // myRegion becomes unreachable here. We reclaim the whole thing
      // immidiately. But some of the subobjects of syntaxTree might be
      // in heap h. And now we have no way to trace them because
      // syntaxTree might be a dangling pointer.
      geos
    }

Well, that doesn't work. Maybe we do need the tricky definition. Let's try it
again, but this time, access paths are associated with heaps: 

    function decodeJson{h1,h2}(content : [u8]{h1}) => (r : JVal)
      where
      // My intuiton for how to build the access set is poor. But here, we
      // extend access by having it return the set of heaps as well.
      Access(r,ArrElements)                  => Unknown, {h2}
      Access(r,(ArrElements.Index)*)         => Unknown, {h2}
      Access(r,ObjMembers)                   => Unknown, {h2}
      Access(r,(ObjMembers.Index.Value)*)    => Unknown, {h2}
      Access(r,ObjMembers.Index.Key)         => Unknown, {h1,h2}
      Access(r,String)                       => Unknown, {h1,h2}
      // Resulting json value may alias the argument content.
      Shape((r,String),(content,empty)) = Unknown
      Shape((r,ObjMembers.Index.Key),(content,empty)) = Unknown
      // Resulting json value does not used internal sharing
      Share((r,(ArrElements.Index)* + (ObjMembers.Index.Value)*)) = 0

Darn. This still doesn't work. We need to know that `decodeJson` does not
allocate any objects in `h1`, and this does not give us that guarantee.
Maybe I should be focusing on `Shape` instead of `Access`:

    function decodeJson{h1,h2}
      ( content : [u8]
        where
        Access(content,empty) = {h1: 1, h2: 0}
      ) => (r : JVal)
      where
      Shape((r,String),(content,empty)) = {h1: 1, h2: 0}
      Shape((r,ObjMembers.Index.Key),(content,empty)) = {h1: 1, h2: 0}

Strings in `h1` are certain to alias the argument. Strings in `h2` cannot alias
the argument because they are in different heaps. Additionally, the argument
is now described as being certainly accessed in h1 but certainly not in h2.
One problem with this formulation is that if we set `h1 = h2`, the finite
maps collapse in a bizarre way. Still, `Shape` feels closer to being the
right thing. Now, it's at least clear that any of the result's subobjects
living in `h1` alias the argument. This means that we could safely deallocate
the region after we are done using the result.

I don't know. Maybe this isn't going anywhere.
