# Lowering of Representation Polymorphic Functions

This post is about a hybrid strategy for delegation of
representation-polymorphic functions. The general idea is that, for some
functions (e.g. `reverse`,`sumAs64`), we want a per-size specialization.
However, we do not necessarily need for everything on top of it in the
call graph to be per-size specialized. This possibility shows up in the
case where the specialized function does not directly have a
representation-polymorphic argument. That is, the representation
polymorphism needs to be tucked behind a data constructor.
Let's consider an example of when this might be useful:

    sum : forall (w : Width). Map (Integer Signed w) -> Integer Signed 64
    sum w Leaf{elements} = sumAs64(w,elements)
    sum w Branch{children} = fold (\acc child -> sum(w,child) + acc) 0 children

We don't really need a bunch of specialized copies of `sum`. What we could
do instead is make the `Width` argument present at runtime. And `sumAs64`
could be specialized but with a wrapper that tail calls into the specializations:

    sumAs64 : forall (w : Width). Array (Integer Signed w) -> Integer Signed 64
    sumAs64 w arr = case w of
      W8 -> sumAs64_8 arr
      W16 -> sumAs64_16 arr
      W32 -> sumAs64_32 arr
      W64 -> sumAs64_64 arr

This requires dependent types. I don't think it should be expressed directly
in this way. There should be some other construct that means the same thing
that this does. The general idea is that there is some family of functions,
and you can call a specialization directly if you know the width, but you
can call the delegation function if you don't. The tail call should make this
extremely cheap.

    index [monomorphic w] : (w : Width) -> (a : Type w) -> Array a -> a
    sumAs64 [specialized w] : (w : Width) -> Array (Integer Signed w) -> Integer Signed 64
    sumAs64 w arr =
      go(acc,ix) = if ix < arr.length
        then go(upcast(index(w,Integer Signed w,arr,index),S64), ix + 1)
        else acc
      go(0 :: S64, 0 :: S64)

The `index` primitive cannot be lowered in a representation polymorphic way.
This is because the size of the return type is not known. We may only call
`index` when we are in specialized or monomorphic setting. We need some kind
of weird trick for making this work. Like maybe different quantifiers for
introducing widths, and then we have two different width contexts. Something
like that.
