# Passing deleted directory to openat()

The behavior of this was not documented anywhere, so I tried it out:

    #include <dirent.h>
    #include <errno.h>
    #include <fcntl.h>
    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <stdlib.h>
    #include <string.h>
    #include <sys/stat.h>
    #include <sys/types.h>
    #include <unistd.h>
    
    static const char filename[] = "openwaitcreate";
    
    int main() {
      int dirFd, regFd;
      if ((dirFd = open(filename, O_DIRECTORY)) < 0) {
        fprintf(stderr, "directory open: %s: %s (errno = %d)\n", filename, strerror(errno), errno);
        exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
      }
      sleep(10);
      if (regFd = openat(dirFd, "example.txt", O_CREAT | O_TRUNC | O_RDWR, S_IRWXU) < 0) {
        fprintf(stderr, "regular file create open: %s: %s (errno = %d)\n", filename, strerror(errno), errno);
        exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
      }
      return 0;
    } 

If you delete the directory `openwaitcreate` while the application is sleeping,
the call to `openat` fails with:

    regular file create open: openwaitcreate: No such file or directory (errno = 2)

# Maximum Path Length

Linux has a `PATH_MAX` constant set to 4096, but it is possible for absolute
paths to be longer than this, and such paths are often usable. For example,
the Linux man page for `getcwd` says:

> On Linux, the kernel provides a getcwd() system call, which the
> functions described in this page will use if possible. The
> system call takes the same arguments as the library function of
> the same name, but is limited to returning at most `PATH_MAX`
> bytes.  (Before Linux 3.12, the limit on the size of the returned
> pathname was the system page size.  On many architectures,
> `PATH_MAX` and the system page size are both 4096 bytes, but a few
> architectures have a larger page size.) If the length of the
> pathname of the current working directory exceeds this limit,
> then the system call fails with the error `ENAMETOOLONG`. In this
> case, the library functions fall back to a (slower) alternative
> implementation that returns the full pathname.

This implementation of `getcwd` in glibc is difficult to read. However, the
implementation in musl is simple and does not perform have a fallback for
long paths:

    #include <unistd.h>
    #include <errno.h>
    #include <limits.h>
    #include <string.h>
    #include "syscall.h"
    
    char *getcwd(char *buf, size_t size)
    {
    	char tmp[PATH_MAX];
    	if (!buf) {
    		buf = tmp;
    		size = PATH_MAX;
    	} else if (!size) {
    		errno = EINVAL;
    		return 0;
    	}
    	if (syscall(SYS_getcwd, buf, size) < 0) return 0;
    	return buf == tmp ? strdup(buf) : buf;
    }

So, it might be the case that Linux's `getcwd` syscall can return handle paths
larger than `PATH_MAX`. It is hard to say without testing a Linux system, and
I am not able to find any documentation describing its behavior.

# Join Points For Immutable Borrows

Here's an idea for borrowing immutable references:

    { rec worker(mutArr)
      { read(0,mutArr) // read from stdin
      ; label.borrow {mutArr = myArray} continue()
        { ... // in here, mutArr is in scope and myArray is not
        ; worker(mutArr)
        }
      ; a = index(myArray,0)
      ; b = index(myArray,1)
      ; ...
      ; continue()
      }
    ; myMutableArray = allocate[U8](1000,u8 0)
    ; worker(myMutableArray)
    }

After the borrowing label `continue` is defined, `myArray` is in scope, and
`mutArr` is not. Or a different way to look at is is that the join
point `continue` counts as the consumer of `mutArr`, so any additional
accesses are prohibited.

What this gives us is the ability to allocate the buffer `mutArr` a single
time. We reuse this buffer over and over rather than allocating a different
block of memory on each iteration.

This approach is a bit of a hack, but it works. Inlining a borrowing label
is not a sound program transformation. This causes certain labels to inhibit
program optimization.

One tricky thing here is that `continue` can accept arguments. What types
can the arguments have? Not immutable arrays. If the arguments could be
immutable arrays, then we could pass the borrowed array as the argument.
We also cannot use types that contain immutable arrays since the immutable
array could have snuck into a value with such a type. This invariant is
tricky and annoying to users because it means that no opaque type can be
an argument to a borrowing join point.

A different approach would be to work with pointers instead of arrays:

    { rec worker(mutPtr)
      { read(0,mutPtr) // read from stdin
      ; label.borrow {mutPtr = immPtr} continue()
        { ... // in here, mutPtr is in scope and immPtr is not
        ; worker(mutPtr)
        }
      ; a = index.ptr(immPtr,0)
      ; b = index.ptr(immPtr,1)
      ; ...
      ; continue()
      }
    ; myMutableArray = allocate[U8](1000,u8 0)
    ; myMutablePtr = ptr.mutable(myMutableArray)
    ; worker(myMutablePtr)
    }

We can design the type system to prohibit pointers from appearing as the
fields to any constructed data types. And then even opaque types could
appear as arguments to `continue`.

We would, however, have to do something to prohibit the user from recovering
the base object from the immutable pointer. This might not be that difficult.
We may not need such an operation anyway since it is only useful in the case
of mutable pointers.
