# Kinds with Refinements

This is a slightly different take on a type system for dealing with bounded
natural numbers. Consider this scheme:

    index :
         (n : Nat)
      -> Array n a
      -> Nat | ? <= n
      -> a

Here, we have a lightweight form a dependent typing, but even a refined
natural can be used in a dependent way.

    copyA :
         (sz : Nat)
      -> (srcIx : Nat)
      -> (srcEx : Nat)
      -> (dstIx : Nat)
      -> (dstEx : Nat)
      -> Array (srcIx + sz + srcEx) a
      -> MutArray (dstIx + sz + dstEx) a
      -> MutArray (dstIx + sz + dstEx) a
    copyB :
         (sz : Nat)
      -> (srcIx : Nat)
      -> (srcSz : Nat | ? >= srcIx + sz)
      -> (dstIx : Nat)
      -> (dstSz : Nat | ? >= dstIx + sz)
      -> Array srcSz a
      -> MutArray dstSz a
      -> MutArray dstSz a

These two ways of expressing `copy` ought to be equivalent. Let's see
if we can express each in terms of the other. We will make use of
subtraction, which restricts its arguments so that the first must be
greater than the second:

    minus : (a : Nat) -> (b : Nat | ? <= a) -> Nat | ? + b = a
    copyB sz srcIx srcSz dstIx dstSz src dst =
      // Inferred: [srcEx : Nat | ? + srcIx + sz = srcSz]
      let srcEx = minus srcSz (srcIx + sz)
      // Inferred: [dstEx : Nat | ? + dstIx + sz = dstSz]
      let dstEx = minus dstSz (dstIx + sz)
      // The typechecker must show that
      //   (Nat | ? + srcIx + sz = srcSz) <: Nat
      // That's a freebe, and same with dstEx. The typechecker must also
      // show that
      //   srcSz <: srcIx + sz + srcEx
      //   srcSz <: srcIx + sz + (Nat | ? + srcIx + sz = srcSz)
      // It's not hard to see that this is trivially true. In fact, both
      // sides are equivalent to one another. But is there a simple
      // algorithm that lets a typechecker see this?
      copyA sz srcIx srcEx dstIx dstEx src dst

Above, the typechecker ends up relying on knowledge about equality to
prove that `srcSz` is a subtype of another expression. I don't
particularly like that this had to be done. As I think about it more,
I do not like the type of `copyA`. The length of an array *must* be
present at runtime (for GC), and expressing it as the sum of three
naturals not bound to a particular identifier makes it unclear how the
compiler would actually lower this function. The second formulation,
`copyB`, is much more clear in this way.

The strange thing about `copyB` is that the relationship between the
indices and the sizes feels inverted. When we write an indexing function,
we tend to say that the index is less than than the length, not that the
length is greater than the index. But here, we end up with the relationship
expressed backwards. Here is a different approach:

    copyC :
         (sz : Nat)
      -> (srcSz : Nat)
      -> (srcIx : Nat | ? + sz <= srcSz)
      -> (dstSz : Nat)
      -> (dstIx : Nat | ? + sz <= dstSz)
      -> Array srcSz a
      -> MutArray dstSz a
      -> MutArray dstSz a

This is pretty good. What's nice about this is that we can define `write` in terms
of `copyC`. (It's not actually a good idea to do this.)

    initialized : (n : Nat) -> a -> MutArray n a
    write :
         (sz : Nat)
      -> MutArray sz a
      -> (ix : Nat | ? + 1 <= sz)
      -> a
      -> MutArray sz a
    write sz dst ix a =
      let src = initialized 1 a
      copyC 1 1 0 sz ix src dst

The typechecker has to show things like:

* Arg 3: `0 <: (Nat | ? + 1 <= 1)`
* Arg 5: `ix <: (Nat | ? + 1 <= sz)` (which is exactly the type that `ix` has)

The expression 0 could actually just have a type like `0 : (Nat | ? <= 0)`.
This defines zero recursively, so we may not actually want to give it that type.
I like this system. In particular, if we just get rid of GTE and only have
LTE, subtyping works nicely, and lots of common operations on arrays end
up with types that are easy to use with one another. The typechecker ought
to understand transitivity as well. For example:

    a : Nat
    b : Nat | ? <= a
    c : Nat | ? <= a
    d : Nat | ? <= b + c
    ==>
    d : Nat | ? <= a + c
    d : Nat | ? <= b + a
    d : Nat | ? <= a + a

Given any LTE inequality involving only naturals, it should be possible to
build a lattice showing all the supertype inequalities. Let's try a different
scenario:

    a : Nat
    b : Nat
    c : Nat | ? <= b
    d : Nat | ? + a <= b
    e : Nat | ? + b <= a
    ==>
    e : Nat | ? + c <= a
    e : Nat | ? + d + a <= a
    e : Nat | ? + d <= 0

This is essentially going in the other direction, but the same thing about
the lattice is true. The difference here is that, in order to build out
the lattice, it's not enough to just consult `a` and `b`. They have no
refinements. On the RHS, we must instead consult the entire context to look
for anything of the form `expr <= b`. Note that the final expression
`e : Nat | ? + d <= 0` should not prove that `d = 0` in any way that is
usable to the system. But should it prove that `e : Nat | ? <= 0`. I am
inclined to say yes, but I don't know if this extra rule causes any other
unexpected issues.

Interestingly, in this system we can show that `x = 0` just by showing
that `x <= 0`, so we do not even need the first form. But we cannot show
equivalent of arbitrary integers (e.g. `x = y`). I've explored that idea
in other entries from this month. Although it's possible to extend things
in that direction, I'm not sure that it's worth it. The common case of
asserting that something is equal to zero doesn't even need this. And
many common uses of natural when traversing arrays do not need to know
about equality. Let's consider a few other situations:

    half : (n : Nat) -> (Nat | ? <= n)
    take, takeEnd :
         (n : Nat)
      -> Array n a
      -> (ix : Nat | ? <= n)
      -> Array ix a
    findElement :
         (n : Nat)
      -> Array n a
      -> a
      -> Option (ix : Nat | ix + 1 <= n)
    findElementRetLenOnMissing :
         (n : Nat)
      -> Array n a
      -> a
      -> (ix : Nat | ix <= n)
    findInSorted :
         (n : Nat)
      -> (prologue : Nat)
      -> Array n a
      -> a
      -> Option (ix : Nat | ? + 1 <= n + prologue)

And some auxiliary case constructs:

    case compare x n of
      LT -> // (x : Nat | ? + 1 <= n)
      EQ -> // (x : Nat | x <= n)
      GT -> // no enrichment

Let's try writing out one of these:

    findInSorted n prologue array needle = case n of
      0 -> None
      1 ->
        // Requires the typechecker to understand n=1 (or at least that n>=1)
        // Just knowing that n<=1 is not enough to allow us to index into
        // the array at position zero.
        case compare needle (index array 0) of
          Eq -> Some prologue
          _ -> None
      _ ->
        m = half n
        midVal = index array m
        case compare needle midVal of
          Eq -> Some (prologue + m)
          Lt -> findInSorted m prologue (take n array m) needle
          Gt -> findInSorted m (prologue + m) (takeEnd n array m) needle

This works, but it requires that the typechecker understand either equality or
GTE. With GTE, a typechecker could deduce:

    n : Nat | ? >= 1
    ix : Nat | ? <= 0
    ==>
    ix : Nat | ? <= 1
    ix : Nat | ? <= n

I really don't want to have both GTE and LTE though. It adds more ways to express
things. Equality is a neat, but it is its own can of worms. Even if we restrict
ourselves to equalities where one side is a constant, what do we do when we have:

    42 = a + b + c

Every time that a, b, or c shows up, we must consider that:

    a = 42 - b - c
    b = 42 - a - c
    c = 42 - a - b

Maybe this isn't as bad as it seems. Substitution is straightforward. Even
an equality like

    a + b = c + d

can be rewritten to:

    a = c + d - b
    b = c + d - a
    c = a + b - d
    d = a + b - c

These subtractions are sound. In general, the user-facing language should not
allow subtractions in refinements, but internally, we could reason about
inequalities using subtraction as long as we made sure that we never created
a term that was negative.

Seen in this light, we can type addition and subtraction as:

    plus  : (a : Nat) -> (b : Nat) -> (c : Nat){c = a + b}
    minus : (a : Nat) -> (b : Nat | ? <= a) -> (c : Nat){a + b = c}

Equality is not a refinement in the same way as LTE, and it must not be treated
like one. It's not attached to one type. Rather, it infects the context.

    a : Nat
    b : Nat
    c : Nat
    a = b + c
    b = c + 1
    d : Nat | ? <= b + c + a
    ==>
    d : Nat | ? <= 2a
    d : Nat | ? <= 2b + 2c
    d : Nat | ? <= 4b + 2
    d : Nat | ? <= a + 2b + 1

There are certain kinds of equalities that we cannot fully exploit. For example:

    x = 2y
    y = x - y // Nope. Now y can be expanded infinitely.

We may replace occurrences of x with 2y. Can we replace occurrences of
2y with x? Maybe. I suppose that we would eventually reach a fixed point
after doing this for long enough, so maybe it's alright.
