# Subtyping as a Way to Refine Elements of Monomorphic Containers

Supposed we have an `IntSet` type. How can we communicate that all of
the integers in the set are less than 100? One option is to provide
a way to lift predicates up over the container:

    myIntSet : (IntSet | intSetAll(? < 100))

A different option is to use the unrefined `Int` type as an upper bound
on the element type of `IntSet`:

    Int : *
    IntSet : (x : * | x <: Int) -> *
    myIntSet : IntSet (Int | ? < 100)

The way I'm using kind signatures above looks strange. I'm not sure how
subtyping interacts with the kinds of types. We want to say that the
argument to `IntSet` is a type, and this type must be a subtype of `Int`.

If we have something like this, we can unify the signatures for monomorphic
and polymorphic collections:

    signature Collection where
      E : *
      C : (x : * | x <: E) -> *
      fold : (b -> a -> b) -> b -> C a -> b
    structure ListCollection where
      E = Top
      C = List
      fold = ...

One difficulty here is that `Top` is not really a type. We should never
actually cast anything to `Top`. What if we have:

    Boundedness = Unbounded | Bounded Type
    Kind = Arrow Kind Kind | Ground Boundedness
    Type = (RawType,Refinement)
    typeKind : Type -> Kind

I don't like this. The same type can have two different kinds. We need for
the boundedness to be something apart from the kind:

    Bounded = Unbounded | Bounded Type
    Kind = Arrow Kind Kind | Ground
    Type = (RawType,Refinement)
    typeKind : Type -> Kind
    typeBound : Type -> Bound

When a type is introduced, it should have both a kind and a bound:

    forall (a : (*)(Int|<100)). a -> a

The bound on any concrete type is always itself:

    Int : (*)(Int)
    (Int|<50) : (*)(Int|<50)

So really, boundedness only matters (or even exists) for type variables.
These two functions mean very different things:

    id1 : forall (a : (*)(Int)). a -> a
    id2 : Int -> Int

The first one must return its argument. The second one can ignore its
argument and return anything. This approach does not work though because
the bound needs to show up in the kinds of type constructors. That is,
we need to be able to write:

    IntSet : Bounded Int -> Unbounded

But even that's not quite right. The result kind of `IntSet` is actually
bounded. We know that the type of is an `IntSet`.

It seems like kinds do not play nicely with bounds. Maybe it does work
though. In A Theory of Higher-Order Subtyping with Type Intervals, the
authors use this:

    ∀ X ≤ A:K . B   // type-level bounded quantifier
    (X ≤ A:K) -> J  // kind-level dependent arrow

Here, `X` and `A` must have the same kind. Let's try again:

    Int : *
    IntSet : (x <: Int : *) -> *
    myIntSet : IntSet (Int | ? < 100)

Now let's try the collection signature:

    signature Collection where
      E : *
      C : (x <: E : *) -> *
      fold : (b -> a -> b) -> b -> C a -> b

One problem I still have is that I do not want users to actually be able
to upcast anything to the `Top` type. I need to think about how to prevent
this from happening. Maybe bounding types could be all the regular types,
plus top:

    signature Collection where
      E : Bound // this can be any type or can be top
      C : (x <: E : *) -> *
      fold : (b -> a -> b) -> b -> C a -> b

Also, we don't want this kind of thing going on:

    cons : a -> List b -> List (Union a b)

We want for `cons` to have a normal type:

    cons : forall (a : *). a -> List a -> List a
