# PL Implementation Notes

Some thoughts from working on lithnext:

* Building a two-level system has worked well. At the staged level, we have
  functions, types, modules, and functors. I refer to all of these as "components".
  All of these are resolved at compile time, and the outcome of resolution is a
  big map of functions (and a function id indicating the entry point). The staged
  level includes let bindings. This means that all functions, modules, etc.
  are actually defined anonymously, but they are typically bound to an identifier
  immidiately afterward. I am not aware of another programming language
  that works this way, but this approach simplifies the implementation.
* Functors are more liberal in both arguments and results than SML has
  them. For example, they can return functions.
* Most places where you would expect a type actually have a component. We
  need this so that the user can project a type from a module in those
  places.
* We need some way to annotate functions with the name that they were
  originally bound to. This isn't always possible since functions can
  be defined anonymously. But it is usually possible. This needs to happen
  early in the compilation pipeline before optimizations.
* Using a structural system instead of a nominal system for algebraic data
  types simplifies the language's implementation. We don't have to keep
  track of user-defined types because there are no user-defined types.
  There are only aliases. This makes it impossible to do any typeclass-style
  stuff. I like having an `Eq` typeclass though. We could just have
  structurally defined equality (which would mean that all types support
  equality checks), but that does not work correctly for ordered containers
  that allow different representations of the same data. I need to figure
  out a way to improve this situation, but I don't have any good ideas for
  this at the moment.
* The structural type system means that recursion needs to be done in a
  debruijn style. I've not actually tried to write the function that
  checks types for equality, but I don't think it will be too hard.
* The next level up from the staged level needs to give the user access
  to type variables in function declarations. Then we can lower these
  to module functors that take type arguments and output a function.
  I am dreading this. Part of the dread is that I'll need to have another
  parser and another typechecker that are nearly the same as the ones
  that I already have. Maybe I can figure out how to get better code
  reuse in this situation. But honestly, I think it's better to not
  bother with code reuse for this. All the PL stuff I have played with
  has convinced me that code reuse in this domain a fool's errand.
* This next level up will also introduce type constructors.
* Back to code reuse. An interesting property of backpack and SML is that
  you can include data types in signatures. I have never been able to
  find a good use for this before now. But I realized that the
  "resolved term" and the "unresolved term" have the same data constructors
  and most of the same fields. They have slightly different fields in
  same places (component vs type). I think that I can share the implementation
  of the typechecker between the two. And probably also a pretty printer.
  One difficulty is that, in the staged level, component and term and
  mutually recursive. This makes backpack not work well for this.
  Maybe it's better to not try doing this. I'm also not sure if this
  will work once the next level up is added.

# Type Constructors (And The Next Level Up)

What might this level look like? Extending the syntax from 2023-12-18:

    { Option = tylam (a : Type). constructed
      { None
      , Some { value : a }
      }
    ; fromOption : Function{a}(a, Option(a))(a) = function(...)(...) { ... }
    ; ...
    }

We have:

    Option     : Type -> Type
    fromOption : Function{a}(a, Option(a))(a)

Let's take a step back. I want to motivate this first. Why do this at all?
We could actually just use module functors to accomplish this. It is
important to have this higher level because eventually, it would be
nice to be able to lower to something that correctly shared code paths
for different types that had the same representation. I don't want to
build that backend yet because every time I've tried to do it, it has
because too complicated. But that door needs to be kept open.

Note: Functor Dependent Type. I've realized when trying to write out
types and kinds that Functor needs the result to be able to reference
the argument (a dependent type):

    functor(){} / Functor(a : A,B) / alias

I believe that is still compatible with type synthesis.
Here is what the example looks like when lowered to functors:

    { Option : Functor(_ : Type)(Type) = functor(a : Type) constructed
      { None
      , Some { value : a }
      }
    ; fromOption : Functor(a : Type)(Function(a, Option(a))(a)) =
        functor(a : Type) function(...)(...) { ... }
    ; ...
    }

In functor types, we should probably use debrujin indices instead of names
so that type equality is easier.

So, back to the discussion of the higher-level language, what fundamentally
is needed here?

1. Some kind of type-level lambda. This lets us create type constructors.
2. Introduction of universally quantified type variables in function declarations.

The lowering of both of these is trivial. They both become functors. Functors
take a single argument, so in both cases, we are possibly building a chain
of functors that return functors.

I think we can also support higher-kinded types, but I have not fully
thought through this. I think our new system looks like this:

    function{}()(){}            / Function{x,y,z}(A,B)  / Alias (note: DT)
    module{}                    / Module{}              / Alias
    values                      / Int,Bool,Float / Type / Kind
    functor(){}                 / Functor(a : A,B)      / Alias (note: DT)
    tylam (v0 : k0 : Kind).
          (v1 : k1 : Kind)      / Tylam(k0,k1)          / Kind
    where
    Kind = Type | Tylam(Kind,Kind)
