# Simple Integer Compression Scheme, Plus Complications

This is inspired by some of the schemes described in Decoding Billions.
I'll introduce it as three layers.

## Layer 1 (the essence of it)

Instead of binary packing, it relies on byte packing. Integers are broken
into blocks, which 64 integers per block. Each block has a base integer
(represented as an s64). All integers in the block are expressed as a delta
from the one base. This avoids the need for cumulative sum. Next, there is a
byte count, which is how many bytes each offset is represented by. Then there
is the actual payload. The offsets are in little-endian byte order. Here is an
example encoding the array `[20001,22000,20100]`:

* Base: 20000
* Bytes per offset: 2
* Payload: 1, 2000, 100 (represented with 2 bytes each)

The numbers that can be used for bytes per offset are all of the numbers
0 through 8. When the byte count is 0, it means all the numbers are the
same. Byte counts of 0, 1, 2, 4, and 8 mean that certain operations do
not require decoding the data into an intermediate buffer.

What's the overhead here? We must always pay 8 bytes for the base plus another
1 byte to express the byte count. There is some other metadata we will pack
into the front when we extend this scheme, so lets go ahead and pad this
out to 16 bytes. Then we have the payload. When numbers can be described as
8-bit offsets, we end up using a total of 80 bytes (1.25 bytes per number),
and when they can be described as 16-bit offsets, we use 144 bytes (2.25 bytes
per number). I think this is acceptable.

Compressing an array of s64 integers is done by computing both the maximum
and the minimum element. Take the difference between these. Decide how
many bytes are needed to represent this difference. Subtract the minimum
from all elements and represent the difference with the chosen number of bytes.

## Layer 2 (patching)

Decoding Billions describes patching. This is a scheme for representing
numbers that do not compress nicely apart from the others. There are a lot of
ways to do this. Since we only have 64 elements in each block, we can choose
some small number, maybe 4 or 6, and say that no more than this number of
elements may be patched in. Now our format might look like this:

* Base (8 bytes)
* Patch Mask (8 bytes, 1 bit for each element)
* Bytes per offset (1 byte)
* Number of patched elements (1 byte)
* Compressed elements
* Patched elements (VByte/LEB128/flit). These must not be represented as offsets
  because there are s64 integers that are more than 2^63 away from each other.

When the patch mask is 0, no patching takes place. The mask has a 1 at any
positions that are patched in. It's possible to represent this more efficently.
For example, we could pack 5 6-bit numbers into a 32-bit word, and these numbers
are the patched indices. Or we could fit 3 of them into a 16-bit word. For
patched elements, the value in the compressed elements array is not used, but
it should probably be assigned to 0. With 5 numbers, we can patch almost 8% of
our indices, which seems like reasonable percentage.

Let's look at decompression first because it's easier. To figure out the
smallest fixed-width word type we can decompress into (s8, s16, s32, or s64),
we first consult the bytes per offset. Then we scan the patched elements.
Then have our answer width. Next, we enumerate the offsets and dump them
into the output buffer (including the bogus ones that are patched out).
Finally, we enumerate the patched element list, pasting each one into
its appropriate spot.

Now we turn to compression. This is trickier. It is no longer sufficient to
compute a maximum and a minimum. We need to know the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th
greatest elements and least elements. I don't know how to do this cheaply.
We can just scan the array several times and figure it out. Then, we get
an answer. Something like:

    Least:    10000, 12000, 12100, 12105
    Greatest: 99999, 50000, 13000, 12120

The winning move here is to pick the range [12000,12120]. Each element can
be represented by a single byte, and there are 4 elements that must be patched.
I'm not sure about an algorithm for making this decision. You can probably just
brute force it. First you figure out what the smallest range you can get is.
Then you choose whichever bounds make that possible with the fewest number
of patched elements. Before we go on to the next section, I'd like to suggest
a rearrangement of the layout:

* Patch Indices (up to 5 of them, 4 bytes, 6 bits for each index)
* Bytes per offset (1 byte, numbers [0-8])
* Number of patched elements (1 byte)
* Padding for 8-byte alignment (2 zeros)
* Compressed elements
* Base (VByte/LEB128/flit, 0-9 bytes)
* Patched elements (VByte/LEB128/flit)

One common case might be having 64 numbers in the 8-bit range (base of 0) with no
patching. To represent this, we would need 4 + 1 + 1 + 2 + 64 + 1 + 0 = 73 bytes.
Not bad, but I don't like that one stray byte that puts of just past a nice
multiple of 8. If we move the base to before the compressed elements (where
the padding is), and the base was less than 2^14 (or 2^13 because of using zigzag
for negative numbers), then we would use only 72 bytes.

Or we could instead start with the compressed elements, put the fixed-size items
at the end, and put the variable-length stuff in the middle. This relies on
something outside of this system knowing the length of the block, but it
has the nice advantage of a predicatable location of the compressed elements.

## Layer 3 (patching bigint numbers)

One nice property of LEB128 is that it can encode integers of any size. What if
we encoded both small and large patched numbers in the exact same way? We could
reserve a bit somewhere to communicate whether or not *any* of the patched
numbers were out of the s64 range. We would need to abandon the approach of
storage patch indices since we would need to be able to handle the worst case
of all of the integers being bigints. Let's put fixed-width attributes at the
end, variable-width in the middle, and the compressed elements at the beginning.

* Compressed elements
* Patch Indices (up to 5 of them, 4 bytes, 6 bits for each index)
* Patched elements (LEB128, unlimited length)
* Base (LEB128, 1-10 bytes, must be s64, possibly use flit instead, which would be 1-9 bytes)
* Patched element mask (8 bytes, possibly make this optional to save space in common case)
* Number of patched elements (1 byte, [0-64])
* Bytes per offset (1 byte, numbers [0-8])
