# Smaller Bites

I think I've finally figured out what all features I want in a programming
language. I tried to work on it some this weekend, but going through the
exercise of writing a type checker that supports user-defined data types for
the tenth or twentieth time is exausting. I'm trying to figure out if there
are ways to complete meaningful subprojects, where the results of each step
can eventually be glued together. Here are several thoughts:

* Trying to build a flexible AST that subsumes all others does not
  seem to work. I've tried this before, and then results were not very
  good. That is, the types need to be more concrete.
* Build an intepreter. An interpreter doesn't care about things being
  stack allocated, region allocated, or heap allocated. It doesn't care
  about garbage collection since it reused the host language's garbage
  collector. And it doesn't care about refinements or invariants. Everything
  invariant (e.g. is this index in bounds?) just gets checked before every
  operation. Essentially, the language used to define programs for the
  interpreter is much more simple. We ought to be able to lower a program
  in a language with more types into a program in a language with less
  types. This seems like a fun angle of attack. The language used by
  the interpreter should have its own syntax, and it should be possible
  to write programs in it without having the higher-level language exist
  at all.
* Make some kind of reusable system for dealing with substitution. Not
  sure if this is possible, but I've implementated substitution several
  times, and it always feels like a drag to work on it.
* Build a slightly high level assembler. It should be possible to come
  up with arbitrary names for registers (not choose them by hand), and
  then as long as the lifetimes work out and no spilling is needed, the
  assembler could choose how to map them to actual instructions. There's
  other stuff too like tracking flags and hiding the real x86 instructions
  behind more general pseudoinstructions (e.g. don't make the user have
  to think about choosing `SHR` or `SHRX`).
