# DT with Levels

What if, in a DT system, you had a ground level without any support for DT?
And then, on top, you could refine functions. For example:

    append : List a -> List a -> List a
    length : List a -> Int
    lengthNonNeg : (xs : List a) -> (length xs >= 0)
    appendLength : (xs : List a) -> (ys : List a) -> (length xs + length ys = length (xs + ys))

You have to be able to lift terms from the ground level to the ghost level
so that they can be scrutinized there. But you do not have to be able to
go back in the other direction. Also, in the ghost level, everything has
to be total. The ground level should not share that restriction.

We could add preconditions to functions like this:

    // Crashes if second argument is greater than first
    midpoint : Int -> Int -> Int
    midpointGt : (x : Int) -> (y : Int) -> (x <= y) -> (midpoint x y >= x)
    midpointLt : (x : Int) -> (y : Int) -> (x <= y) -> (midpoint x y <= y)

But the preconditions are not available to the compiler. The compiler still
has to generate checks to make sure the preconditions are satisfied. It's
for the benefit of the user that these exist. It lets the user verify certain
properties of their code, but it doesn't help speed things up. Maybe there
is a sophisticated whole-program-analysis technique could discover that
a functions is *always* called with its preconditions satisfied, but I'm
not concerned about that for now.

It also makes sense to be able to assert that a ground-level function is total.
For example, `length` never crashes and `midpoint` doesn't crash when its
preconditions are met. I think the fact that a function appears in a predicate
at all should indicate that it is total in that context.

Let's revisit the idea that `length` is total. It's only total when the
list has less than 2^63 elements in it. It is not possible for a list to
become this large because we would run out of memory while constructing it.
One idea for how to accomplish this would be to introduce a magic ghost-level
`height` function that is defined for all types and is basically just
the successor maximum height of any child field. Alternatively, we could
make the height be the *sum* of the child height rather than the maximum.
I think this second definition might be more useful. Any "leaf" data constructor
has a height of zero (or possibly one). We have some magic proofs about all data:

    // These all live at ghost level 
    height : (x : a) -> Int
    heightLt : (x : a) -> (height x <= 2^31)
    heightGt : (x : a) -> (height x >= 0)

Additionally, for each type, `height` gets a builtin definition that relates
the heights of child fields to the heights of the parent object. Now we can
assert that `length` is total and "small":

    length : List a -> Int
    length Nil = 0
    length (Cons _ xs) = 1 + length xs

    lengthEqHeight : (xs : List a) -> (length xs = height xs)
    lengthEqHeight Nil = Nil
    lengthEqHeight (Cons _ xs) = cong succ (lengthEqHeight xs)

    lengthSmall : (xs : List a) -> (length xs <= 2^31)
    lengthSmall xs = substitute (lengthEqHeight xs) (heightLt xs)

I like this system.
