# Regions for Stack-Allocated Data

Instead of allowing objects to be allocated on the stack, what if we just
had regions instead, and we tried to arrange them in such a way that it
worked like the stack. What do we need to make this work?

1. Regions are backed by 4KB slabs. Objects of varying size classes are
   bump allocated into slabs together. Potentially large objects (arrays)
   need some kind of special treatment.
2. The compiler must be able to detect a region's end-of-life in simple
   cases. If a region is allocated in a function and is not returned
   from it, the end of the region's life is typically the last time that
   it was read from. There is no explicit operation for deallocating a region.
3. The compiler must be able to detect if a region holds a finite amount
   of bounded-size objects. This information can be used to remove the
   checks that a bump allocator needs to determine when to grab a new
   block.
4. Slabs available to be used by regions are stored in a stack. Each
   thread has it's own stack and has to perform some kind of expensive
   (synchronized) operation when the stack is depleted. When a region
   dies, it is pushed on top of the stack. 
5. Putting everything together, if the compiler detects bounded allocations
   into a region, and if the compiler can when the region dies, and if the
   region is allocated in a loop, the compiler can forego putting the slab
   back on the stack and can use it as the initial backing slab for the
   new region.

For the loopy case, we need code that looks like this:

    rec join point loop (r : Region, i : Int, acc : Accumulator):
      case i >= 0:
        T:
          alloc (x : Person) into r 
          x.name = "baz"
          x.age = 42
          y = freeze(x)
          s = new region
          loop(s,i - 1,acc)
        F: acc

It would be nice if we could make this more explicit with some kind of
"reset region" operation. Maybe that's possible. I think so. We just
need to remove `r` from scope:

    s = reset(r)

Nevermind, this doesn't actually work. We cannot know that we hold a unique
reference to the region that had been passed in. So we actually need some
help from linear/uniqueness types to make this sound.
