# Monomorphization, Again

I wrote about this on 2022-07-12. I have noticed a problem with the
solution that I suggested at that time. The problem is we really need
to track whether we are dealing with a signed integer or an unsigned
integer. We need to do this because

* Lots of arithmetic primops have signed and unsigned variants
* Numeric refinements may only be attached to word types
 
If we have a type like `Map a`, we will end up with:

    Map<Word 8>
    Map<Word 16>
    ...

And the types `Map (Signed16 | < 1000)` and `Map (Signed16 | < 500)`
would be collapsed into a single type: `Map<Word 16>`. This is no good.
In fact, we would lose all of our refinements, but we would really
like to keep those around through monomorphization. What about
treated signedness like we do boxed types?

    data Width = W8 | W16 | W32 | W64
    data Signedness = Signed | Unsigned | Abstract SignednessId
    data Type
      = Word (Option Signedness) Width
      | Bool
      | Boxed Box
      | Pointer Type

Now we get:

    forall (s : Signedness). Map<Word s 8>
    forall (s : Signedness). Map<Word s 16>
    forall (a : Box). Map<Boxed a>
    insertW8  : (s : Signedness). Word64 -> Word8 s -> MapW8[s] -> MapW8[s]
    ...

I think this works out alright.

# Other Thoughts

I still don't love the fact that functions like addition and multiplication
have visibly different behavior depending on the width and signedness of
the argument type, but I'm slowly coming to grips with this. One problem
is that the alternative solution, modules/typeclasses, does not work
particularly well with with refined integer types. We need to be able to
say "this is a type, and this type can be refined with simple inequality
predicates", and the only types that works well for are integral types. There's
just no way around it. There are a few functions that do actually have the
same behavior for all integral types:

* Read integral type from an array
* Using an integer as an array index (read/write)
* Minimum, maximum, midpoint
* Comparison functions
* Upcast to 64 bits

So, we can write something like `sum : [Word Signed w] -> Word Signed 64`,
which crashes when overflow happens, and it behaves the exact same way for
8, 16, 32, and 64 bit numbers, but we could not write `sum` with a return
type that matched the argument type. We can also write a permute function
`permute : {n} -> {m} -> (Array (Word s w | >=0, <=n-1) | len=m) -> (Array a | len=n) -> (Array a | len=m)`,
and I don't see a way that this could be done with modules.

We could distinguish between primops that accept variables for signedness
and width and those that do not. The latter category could still be dealt
with using modules. This way, we could the everything we expect. 
