# Small Decisions About Module System

A few thoughts:

1. Use higher-order module functors (currying) to support passing multiple
   arguments to a module functor. Constraining types (SML's `where type`)
   works naturally with this. This is also nice because it makes it a little
   more simple to define a module functor (just one argument).
2. Do not let module signatures have datatype declarations. That is,
   data constructors cannot be exposed in a signature. This restriction
   can be lifted later.
3. In a module, we can declare types as aliases or as ADTs with constructors.
   These two are a little different from one another. Ultimately, we have
   to preserve all the ADTs when we lower the language.
4. It's not fundamentally important to be able to pass a type to a module
   functor since the type can just be wrapped in a module, but I think that
   supporting this is useful enough that it should be done. Might want to
   do the same thing with passing functions to module functors. In both
   cases, it lets us avoid inventing a module for no real purpose.
5. I think the combination of debruijn indices (for module depth) and names
   is working well.
6. I need to think more about whether or not modules and module functors should
   be allowed to appear without being bound to names. With module functors,
   such a thing is very useful because they are curried. With modules, it is
   less useful, but it's more in the spirit of SML to allow this.
7. The "qualified identifier" thing is a little weird. We have a debruijn index,
   a chain of module identifiers, and then the actual identifier. This makes
   it so that you cannot do things like `parent.child.parent.child...` which
   is a bizarre thing to do anyway, but still, it feels a little wrong.
