# Concluding Thoughts on Automatic Memory Management

I will probably stop thinking about automatic memory management for a
while after today. I've explored ASAP memory management the last two days,
and here are some of my thoughts:

* The ASAP paper, which is 145 pages, doesn't talk about copying collectors
  at all. The strategy feels similar to mark-and-sweep. The deallocation
  strategy involves scanning the antimatter set, which means that everything
  that isn't live has to be touched to reclaim it.
* The paper discusses regions as an alternative but does not discuss how
  regions and ASAP might work together. I am not sure that they are
  compatible.
* ASAP is intent on reclaiming components of on-heap objects that are no
  longer accessed. This can either leave dangling pointers in objects, or
  it can set them to null.
* Section 6.4 opens with "In its current form, ASAP is not equipped to handle
  concurrent programs". I agree with this.
* The analysis of program points (computing a matter set and an antimatter set)
  requires that the program points be successive. I have thought about whether
  ASAP could be extended to analyze program points that are further from
  one another, and it seems like this would not work. If there is an object
  that becomes live and dies between the program points, it would not be in
  the matter set (not accessed after P2). It is used after P1 but the object
  doesn't exist at P1, so it's weird for it to appear in Access(P1) and in
  the antimatter set.
* ASAP performs its analyses in a way that pushes information from callers
  into callees (e.g. what parts of the return value are used). I think
  this kind of optimization makes performance unpredictable.
* ASAP analysis involves Shape, Share, Access.

What are the behaviors that I actually want from an automatic memory management
system?

* Regions (bulk deallocation). I don't want this exposed to a user though.
  Let's say that a function allocates some arbitrary amount of memory and
  an object from which all of the allocations can be reached. I want all of
  those objects to be in a region together. The caller of such of function
  might: (A) read from the object to build something new and then discard it
  or (B) read from the object and build something that aliases it. Case A
  is where there is an easy win available. We just throw the whole region
  away and get the reuse that space promptly. In Case B, we just merge the
  region into whatever heap we had previously been working on. No performance
  gain, but also no detriment.
* Support for concurrent programs that run on multi-core machines. (Is is
  difficult for a copying collector to do this without introducing cross-thread
  stop the world pauses.)
* Scales up to a large heap nicely. Does not periodically scan the entire
  heap. Only referrence counting seems to have this property.

Do any of the ideas from ASAP help me accomplish this? The shape-share-access
analysis is useful for detecting non-escaping allocations. We can accomplish
something similar without ASAP by just checking if types overlap, but ASAP
is more precise. Also, this analysis is able to detect certain situations
when allocation is guaranteed to be unused. This could be used as a
non-GC optimization. More like a sophisticated dead code analysis.

Let's revisit the `decodeJson` example from yesterday. This time, every
heap-allocated type is annotated with regions in which it and any of
its children can appear:

    function decodeJson{h1,h2}(content : [u8]{h1}) => (r : JVal{h1,h2})

The information about heaps is not very precise, but it's good enough.
When calling `decodeJson`, if the calling context knew that we were
going to be aliasing some of the strings, we could have it set `h1 = h2`
to allocate into whatever heap we were already using. But if we knew
that nothing from the syntax tree would escape, we could request a
fresh region, pass it to `decodeJson`, and then throw the whole thing
away promptly.

It is strange to me that I cannot figure out how to get ASAP to play
nicely with multiple heaps. It seems like it should be a straightforward
extension, but it's not. One problem is that I cannot figure out how
to annotate binders with information claiming "x lives in this heap".
Maybe a separate `Heap` function (from zone to heap set) would work:

    function decodeJson{h1,h2}
      ( content : [u8]
        where
        Heap(content,empty) = {h1}
      ) => (r : JVal)
      where
      Heap(r,ArrElements)          = {h2}
      Heap(r,String)               = {h1,h2}
      Heap(r,ObjMembers.Index.Key) = {h1,h2}
      Shape((r,String),(content,empty))               = Unknown
      Shape((r,ObjMembers.Index.Key),(content,empty)) = Unknown

Here, we can see that the argument lives in `h1` and the result lives in `h1`
and `h2`. We can see that the string fields might alias the argument. We do
not, however, get any evidence that a non-aliasing string was allocated
in `h2`. I'm not sure that this evidence is necessary, but it would be
nice to be able to express it. One source of guidance is that we
should be able to set `h1 = h2` and information should simplify to
something that is still correct. Maybe just having Access and Shape
accept a heap argument works:

    function decodeJson{h1,h2}
      ( content : [u8]
        where
        Heap(h1,content,empty) = 1
        Heap(h2,content,empty) = 0
        Access(h1,content,empty) = 1
        Access(h2,content,empty) = 0
      ) => (r : JVal)
      where
      Heap(h1,r,ArrElements)        = 0
      Heap(h2,r,ArrElements)        = 1
      Access(h1,r,ArrElements)          = 0
      Access(h1,r,String)               = Unknown
      Access(h1,r,ObjMembers.Index.Key) = Unknown
      Access(h2,r,ArrElements)          = Unknown
      Access(h2,r,String)               = Unknown
      Access(h2,r,ObjMembers.Index.Key) = Unknown
      Shape(h2,(r,String),(content,empty))               = 0
      Shape(h2,(r,ObjMembers.Index.Key),(content,empty)) = 0
      Shape(h1,(r,String),(content,empty))               = Unknown
      Shape(h1,(r,ObjMembers.Index.Key),(content,empty)) = Unknown

We still have a `Heap` function as well. I don't know if heaps need to be
three-valued or not. It is used to help create Access.  If we set `h1 = h2`,
then we merge overlapping matches by taking the union of them. Union(0,1) = 1.
Here, we have finally expressed what we wanted to. Now it is clear that
nothing in h2 aliases the argument (as long as h1 and h2 are distinct).

Armed with this additional precision, we can allocate into regions in
a few more situations. Suppose there is a function that decodes a
json syntax tree to something involving text, but the text is always
some transformation of the original text.

    decodeFoo{h1,h2}
      ( v : JVal
        where
        Heap(h1,v,*) = 1
        Heap(h2,v,*) = 0
      ) => (foo : Foo)
      where
      Shape(h1,(v,*),(foo,*)) = 0
      Shape(h2,(v,*),(foo,*)) = 0

When we call `decodeFoo`, we would first create a third heap, then we
pass in the union of the original two heaps as h1 and the new heap as h2.

This is all very complicated. I think I have finally burned myself out.
