# Region Types and Ergonomics

I've been thinking about regions types again recently. This language
feature is in a tricky position. Several factors contribute to this:

1. Most users do not ever need to use regions types.
2. Region types must be visible to users in some way.
3. Values of primitive types (e.g. 64-bit integers) do not live on the heap.
   Consequently, they cannot belong to a region.

I speculate that any implementation of region types that forces all functions
to be written in a region-polymorphic way is doomed to fail. It's just too
much of a burden for users. Let's consider a very restricted form of region
types. The restrictions are:

* Type variables cannot be associated with regions. Only concrete types can.

Let's consider the type of a JSON syntax tree:

    record Member {r : Region} =
      { key : Text
      , value : Value r
      }
    data Value {r : Region}
      = Nil
      | True
      | False
      | Number ...
      | String Text
      | Object (Array (Member r) {r})
      | Array (Array (Value r) {r})
    decode : (r : Region) -> [U8] -> Option (Value r)

This seems manageable. One design decision is that the payload of a `String`
does not live in the region. This is because a parser may want to reuse the
text contents of a string, and we do not want for it to have to copy the
contents. There is no best choice here. The best choice depends on what
the parser does with the syntax tree. If all the strings are resolved to
some other type, then it would be better for them to all live in the region.
Additionally, if nothing in `Value` can point out of the region, then the
garbage collector can ignore it entirely when scanning.

Notably, `Array` takes a region type variable. In fact, nearly any boxed
type could do this:

    data List (a : Type) (r : Region)
      = Cons a (List a {r})
      | Nil

With `List`, this is somewhat natural. You can recover the normal regionless
`List` type with:

    type NormalList a = List a {Heap}

And several `List` functions are very naturally region polymorphic:

    cons : a -> List a {r} -> List a {r}
    sum : List Int {r} -> Int
    fold : (b -> a -> b) -> b -> List a {r} -> b
    replicate : (r : Region) -> a -> List a {r}

We can do the same thing with other types, but performing immutable updates on
most collections doesn't make sense when working with regions. Consider
a region-polymorphic insertion for maps:

    insert : (r : Region) -> Map a {r} -> Int -> a -> Map a {r}

While this technically works, it's dangerous because the implementation
will leak memory. So, perhaps we should restrict it:

    insert : Map a {Heap} -> Int -> a -> Map a {Heap}

But there are meaningful operations that can be performed on maps that
live in regions:

    lookup : (r : Region) -> Map a {r} -> Int -> Option a
    fromList : (r : Region) -> [(Int,a)] -> Map a {r}

If we build the list all at once, we can be certain that we don't leak
any memory. And then of course it's safe to perform lookups on all
kinds of lists. In fact, it's the same exact code.

So, what do we really want? For functions that consume an argument in a
"view only" way, we can always be polymorphic in the region. And the
generated code looks the same for all cases. But for functions that
construct new values by grafting together old ones (or pieces of old
ones), region polymorphism is often less useful. It works fine for
`cons`, but it's a rotten deal for insert. So perhaps we could forego
it entirely. After all, we would need different code paths for allocation
anyway. Let's define some types:

    data Region
    data Heap = Local Region | Global  

The type of `lookup` could alternatively be written as:

    lookup : (exists (h : Heap). Map a {h}) -> Int -> Option a

Which we could clean up a little further:

    lookup    : Map a          -> Int -> Option a
    insert    : Map a {Global} -> Int -> a -> Map a {Global}
    fromListL : (r : Region)   -> [(Int,a)] -> Map a {Local r}
    fromListG :                   [(Int,a)] -> Map a {Global}

So, the innocuous `Map a` is actually a shorthand for a dependent sum.
In the user-facing language, any `Map` (on the global heap or in a local
region) could be casted to this without any work from the user. One
strange property of the design is that users cannot write a function
that returns `Map a`.

This strategy gives the best syntax to *consumers* of data, not to producers
of it. We could tweak this:

    lookup    : Map a {}       -> Int -> Option a
    insert    : Map a          -> Int -> a -> Map a
    fromListL : (r : Region)   -> [(Int,a)] -> Map a {Local r}
    fromListG :                   [(Int,a)] -> Map a

Now, maps that are in the global heap have the best syntax. Note that
we still have a shorthand for a dependent sum involving a region (now
written as `{}`). This is probably the best point in the design space.
If someone has a function that consumes boxed data without returning
any part of it, all they have to do is change from `Foo` to `Foo {}`
in the function's type signature, and the caller is now allowed to
provide a region-allocated `Foo` instead.

Note that this still supports functions like `cons`, but the caller
has to write two variants of `cons`. If we supported heap variables
(instead of just region variables) and specialized based on heap
variables, we could get rid of the need for two variants. We probably
need this anyway. For example:

    write : {h : Heap} -> MutableArray a {h} -> Int -> a -> MutableArray a {h}


