# Tracking Array Length Loosely

Instead of rigorously tracking bounds for array indices, what if we tried
to use a module system to do it and gave the user some escape hatches:

    data Nat = N // just one data constructor
    sig TrackedArray
      Array : Nat -> * -> *
      Finite : Nat -> *
      Integer : Nat -> *
      replicate : Integer n -> a -> Array n a
      index : Array n a -> Finite n -> a
      assume : Array n a -> Array m a
      run : (Int | >=0) -> (forall n. Integer n -> a) -> a

Unfortunately, it's a little more complicated than this. We want to
have addition of nats be associative and commutative. We really want
the compiler to understand that nats form a ring:

    (+) : Nat -> Nat -> Nat
    (*) : Nat -> Nat -> Nat
    a + b = b + a
    a * b = b * a
    a + a = 2 * a
    0 * a = 0
    ... and so on

We can add `One : Nat` to `TrackedArray`, but it does not end up working
well with multiplication. The problem is that if `One` is an opaque constant,
we do not know that `One * One = One`.

We already need at least one kind of `Const` type constructor for this. What
if we added:

    ConstNat : KnownNat -> Nat
    ConstNat 5 + ConstNat 7 = ConstNat 12
    ConstNat _ = N

We need something that blocks the reduction to `N`. If `ConstNat` lives at the
top level, nothing can block the reduction. So it must live in the signature.
But if it lives in the signature, then the signature itself must have some
kind of magical properties to perform constant folding.

We could just give up on the problem of multiplication and say that the
types `One` and `One * One` are not the same. We would want to have a
type-level function for scaling nat expressions by a constant:

    Scale : KnownNat -> Nat -> Nat
    Scale 3 (n + One) = 3n + 3 One
    Scale 0 _ = 0

Multiplying nats ends up producing buggy results:

    (n + 1 One) * (n + 2 One) = 1 n^2 + 3 n One + 2 One^2

The occurrences of `One` in the result will get in the way of using this
system, and the user will have to manually remove them.

I'm not sure if there is any better way to do this. We could try
making `ConstNat` top level and blocking reduction with a bogus argument:

    ConstNat : KnownNat -> Nat -> Nat
    ConstNat 5 n + ConstNat 7 n = ConstNat 12 n
    ConstNat 5 n * ConstNat 7 n = ConstNat 35 n
    ConstNat 1 k * n = n
    ConstNat _ N = N

If we do this, then we need to feed in a fake natural type variable any
time we have a constant:

    replicate4 : (k : Nat) -> a -> Vector (ConstNat 4 k) a

The reduction is blocked. Let's try the multiplication example again:

    (n + ConstNat 1 k) * (n + ConstNat 2 k)
    =
    n^2 + n * ConstNat 2 k + ConstNat 1 k * n + ConstNat 1 k * ConstNat 2 k
    =
    n^2 + n * ConstNat 2 k + ConstNat 1 k * n + ConstNat 3 k
    = // this part requires a more tricky rule
    n^2 + n * ConstNat 3 k + ConstNat 2 k

Indexing into an array of known length:

    index : forall k. Array (ConstNat 4 k) a -> Finite (ConstNat 4 k) -> a

This is a very unsatisfying solution to this problem, but it works. It is
just not very ergonomic. It is much nicer to write:

    index : Array 4 a -> Finite 4 -> a

Let's consider a magic signature:

    Const : Nat -> ConstNat -> Nat
    Const n c = n // reduction
    sig ConstantNat
      Constant : ConstNat -> Nat
      // N1 = Constant 1
      // N2 = Constant 2
    module ConstantNatImpl
      Constant = Const N
    Const.Constant 5 + Const.Constant 7 = Const.Constant 12

This needs some kind of rule for the typechecker that makes ConstantNat
do the right thing. That's still pretty gross to have to implement.

What if instead, we have:

    data Nat = ... // all the actual natural numbers

And then we have a pass that just deletes all types of kind Nat.
We still use modules for `Finite`, `Integer`, and `Array`.

    sig TrackedArray
      Array : Nat -> * -> *
      Finite : Nat -> *
      Integer : Nat -> *
      n0 : Integer 0
      n1 : Integer 1
      n2 : Integer 2
      replicate : Integer n -> a -> Array n a
      index : forall (n : Nat). Array n a -> Finite n -> a
      assume : Array n a -> Array m a
      run : (Int | >=0) -> (forall n. Integer n -> a) -> a
    module TrackedArrayImpl
      Array = Const1 Vector
      Finite = Const (Int | >=0)
      Integer = Const (Int | >=0)
      replicate : forall (n : Nat). (Int | >=0) -> a -> Vector a
      replicate(n,a) = ...
      run : (Int | >=0) -> (forall n. (Int | >=0) -> a) -> a
      run (i,f) = f @0 i

After module application, we end up with functions that look like this:

    replicate : forall (n : Nat). (Int | >=0) -> a -> Vector a

Where the type variable `n` is unused. It is possible that several distinct
values are passed, but we do not want a duplicate of this function for each
one of those. So we need to rewrite it as:

    replicate : (Int | >=0) -> a -> Vector a

All types of kind `Nat` must be removed. If we blend this together with
the idea of "polymorphic functions are module functors", we would first
end up with 

    module TrackedArrayImpl
      ...
      functor replicate(n : Nat)
        [ (Int | >=0) -> a -> Vector a ]

And then `replicate` has its argument erased:

    module TrackedArrayImpl
      ...
      functor replicate()
        [ (Int | >=0) -> a -> Vector a ]

We have to be careful about when we erase `Nat`. There are two different
ways to do it:

1. Evaluate module functor applications until `Nat` only shows up as the
   kind of unused type variables. Then eliminate it. 
2. Eliminate `Nat` very early, right after typechecking. Remove it from
   signatures, modules, types, functions, everything.

I'm not sure which one of these works better. The second one is weird
because it requires modifying the kinds of types. The first one tries
to avoid this, but I'm not sure that it can. After all, users can
define types that refer to `Nat`. We could prohibit this, and it would
mean that users would need to write this instead:

    data CoordinateVec = { lat : Vec Float, lon : Vec Float }  
    sig SafeCoordinate
      data CoordinateArray : Nat -> Type
      setLat : Array n Float -> CoordinateArray n -> CoordinateArray n
      setLon : Array n Float -> CoordinateArray n -> CoordinateArray n
      getLat : CoordinateArray n -> Array n Float
      getLon : CoordinateArray n -> Array n Float
    module SafeCoordinateImpl
      data CoordinateVec = Const CoordinateArray : Nat -> *
      setLat, setLon, getLat, getLon = ...

The only way to create a type constructor that references `Nat` is with `Const`.
Because of this, it seems likely that application of module functors will remove
all `Nat` kinds from types. I'm not certain that this always works, but it seems
like it should.

After we know that there are no type constructors with kinds involving `Nat`,
we are in an easier situation. Any `Nat` type variables in function
declarations are certain to be irrelevant. They may be removed. Then we
can proceed with the functorification of polymorphic functions. Does it
actually matter when we functorize? I think that it should be fine to
perform it before getting rid of `Nat`. It's preferrable to do it early
because that simplifies the system we are dealing with. So the steps are:

1. Typecheck
2. Functorize (eliminate function polymorphism)
3. MF Application (eliminate module functors)
4. Nat elimination (eliminate `Nat` kind)

This does not work. We need to eliminate `Nat` before MF application. But
maybe there is an even more simple option. What if we just get rid of
Nat elimination. MF application might cause multiple copies of `replicate`
to be created:

    replicate[0][Float] : (Int | >=0) -> Float -> Vec Float
    replicate[4][Float] : (Int | >=0) -> Float -> Vec Float
    replicate[0][U32]   : (Int | >=0) -> U32 -> Vec Float
    replicate[20][U32]  : (Int | >=0) -> U32 -> Vec Float

The bodies of `replicate[0][Float]` and `replicate[4][Float]` are identical
though, and we could clean this up with some other machinery that we will
need anyway. Plus, any such cleanup is optional. It's a performance improvement,
but it's not necessary for a POC to work. So, we are down to three steps

1. Typecheck
2. Functorize (eliminate function polymorphism)
3. MF Application (eliminate module functors)

This does not seem too bad. Also worth mentioning that during MF application,
we have to reduce `Const` whenever it is fully applied. At the end of MF
application, there should not be any occurrences of `Const`. The implies
that HKT are not allowed because they allow you to sneak `Const` into
types in such a way that it cannot be eliminated.

# Monads

We need some kind of type alias for effectful functions:

    sig Monad
      M : Function
      pure : a ->{M} a
      bind : (a ->{M} b, b ->{M} c) -> (a ->{M} c)
    sig Monad
      M : Function
      pure : a ->{M} a
      functor bind(a ->{M} b, b ->{M} c) where
        [ a ->{M} c ]
    functor Reader(e : *) : Monad where
      M = Reader(e)
      pure : (e,a) -> a
      pure = ...
      bind : ((e,a) -> b, (e,b) -> c) -> ((e,a) -> c)
      bind = ... 
    functor Reader(e : *) : Monad where
      M = Reader(e)
      pure : (e,a) -> a
      pure = ...
      functor bind(g : e -> a -> b, h : e -> b -> c) where
        [ f : e -> a -> c 
          f(e,a) = h(e,g(e,a))
        ]
    type Partial     a b = a -> Option b
    type Reader  (e) a b = (e,a) -> b
    type Except  (e) a b = a -> Result e b
    type Parser  (e) a b = Array U8 -> a -> Result e (b, Array U8)
    type IO          a b = a ->! b
    Partial   : Function
    Reader(E) : Function
    IO        : Function

I don't love this, but it's a start.
