# Treatment of arrays unpacked into data constructors

I've been think on and off for a while about how to unify treatment of
heap-allocated arrays (ordinary arrays) and arrays that are unpacked into
a data constructor. The more I think about it, the less sure I am that
it's a good idea to do this. This post is about why. There are several
factors that play into this:

* It is preferrable to not have any undefined behavior (UB) in a language.
  Different languages make different decisions about whether or not to
  allow a user to write a program that includes UB. I'm not going over
  the arguments about this here. My own opinion is that not having any
  UB is a boon for a language.
* Arrays that are unpacked into data constructors are small. These are
  nearly always tree-like structures, and the arrays need to be just
  big enough to make the objects fill out one or two cache lines.
* Ordinary on-heap arrays can be either small or large.
* There are two kinds of UB that languages can expose when working with
  arrays: out-of-bounds access and accessing uninitialized elements.
  Guarding against out-of-bounds access is simple and is somewhat common
  in high-level languages. It just requires checking that the index is
  greater than or equal to zero and is less than the length of the array.
  There are at least two different solutions for preventing the access of
  uninitialized elements. One solution, eager filling, is to require a value at the time
  of allocation, and all elements are initialized to this value. The
  other solution, element tracking, is to have a bitmask where you track which elements
  have been initialized (written to). The two solutions work very differently. The
  first one makes it impossible to access an uninitialized element, and
  the second one causes the access of uninitialized elements to crash
  the program (in a predictable way).
* It is beneficial to distinguish between mutable arrays and immutable
  arrays. The conversion from mutable to immutable is called "freezing".
* Immutable arrays must not contain uninitialized elements. That is,
  the freeze operation must assert that all elements were initialized.

The two strategies for avoiding uninitialized accesses have trade offs.

* In a monomorphic setting, eager filling is nice. If you know the
  type of the element, you can just conjure up a value of that type.
  In a polymorphic setting, finding a filler value can be complicated.
  For operations like `permute` and `append`, it is awkward to have to
  check if an array is null, possibly grab the first element, and then
  initialize everything to that element, when we know all along that
  we are going to overwrite it.
* In a polymorphic setting, element tracking can be preferrable for the
  reason given above. With an optimizing compiler that can figure out if
  all elements are eventually assigned, element tracking is ends up with
  a slight advantage since the optimizer doesn't need to remove the
  computation of the seed element that eager filling requires.
* Element tracking is easy to do when the array has at most 64
  elements. This is because the bitmask fits in a single register, and
  there are lots of BMI instructions that make the calculations easy.
  On large arrays, element tracking requires more computation, and the
  mask array takes up a variable amount of space.
