# Modules, Module Functors, Functions, Values, Types

In an SML-like language, there are five things that can live at the top level:

* Modules
* Module Functors
* Functions
* Values (statically computed)
* Types

It is useful to refer to all of these with the same kind of identifier. Rather
than having `ModuleId` and `FunctionId`, it is more simple to have just
`ComponentId`. Going one step further, I think that module functors should
be able to operate on any type of component. By that, I mean that they should
be able to accept any component as an argument and return any component as
a result. For example:

    functor List : (a : Type) => Type = datatype [ Cons a Recurse, Nil ]
    functor OrderedMap : (m : Module {A : Type, lt : A -> A -> Bool}) => Module { ... } = module { ... }
    functor map : (a : Type) => (b : Type) => (a -> b) => (List a -> List b)

One thing that's neat about this system is that it makes it more natural to
lower polymorphic functions. Consider this example:

    boolEliminator : forall (a : Type). (a, a, Bool) -> a
    ==>
    functor boolEliminator : (a : Type) => ((a,a,Bool) -> a)

# Binding Apart from Modules

What if we declared component separately from their inclusion in a module.
Consider this:

    M : Module { ... } = module
     { X : Type = S64
     , foo : S64 -> S64 = function(x : S64)(S64) { x + x }
     }

What if we could write this instead:

    M : Module { ... } = sequenced-bindings
      { fooDefinition : S64 -> S64 = function(x : S64)(S64) { x + x }
      ; module
        { X : Type = S64
        , foo : S64 -> S64 = fooDefinition
        }
      }

We could even hoist `fooDefinition` up another level. Or we could define
`fooDefinition` using a private helper function that is not exposed to the
end user of `M`. In this system, we separate function and module definitions
from assignment. So we could use the earlier `map` function like this:

    clampNumbers : List S64 -> List S32 = map(S64)(S32)(function(x : S64)(S32) { clamp64_32(x) })

For lambdas that close over an environment, it is a little more tricky.
Consider something like this:

    function effectful()()
      { xs : List S64 <- readNumbersFromStdin
      ; b : S64 <- readBoundFromStdin
      ; ys = map(S64)(S64)(lambda (a : S64). if a > b then b else a)(xs)
      ; pure(ys)
      }

Closing over `b` means that we need a variant of `map` with an environment:

    functor mapWithEnv : (e : Type) => (a : Type) => (b : Type) => ((e,a) -> b) => ((e,List a) -> List b)

And now we could rewrite the call to `map` as

    ys = mapWithEnv(S64)(S64)(S64)(function(e : S64,a : S64) { if a > e then e else a })(b,xs)

And now the function does not close over anything local, so we can hoist
it to the top level. This is similar to closure conversion. Instead of building
a single data type with constructors corresponding to all possible environments
that are closed over, we end up creating many copies of the function.

# Mutual Recursion

Everything I've suggested in this post leaves the possibility of recursion open
via some kind of `recurse` keyword. But mutual recursion becomes impossible.
Let's revisit an example from 2023-11-08 to see if we run into problems when
lowering it:

    functor TextMap : Type -> Type = functor(a : Type) -> datatype
      [ Bin Recurse Recurse
      , Tip a
      ]
    type JsonValue = datatype
      [ Null
      , JsonMap TextMap(Recurse)
      ]
    ==>
    type JsonValue = datatype
      [ Null
      , JsonMap (datatype [ Bin Rec$0 Rec$0 , Tip Rec$1 ] )
      ]

In this lowering, I've added two features:

1. A datatype can be defined inside of another data type. The difficulties
   with supporting this are ergonomic. It is more consistent to allow a
   fresh datatype declaration to appear anywhere like this.
2. As a consequence of supporting nested datatypes, the `Recurse` keyword
   needs to support debruijn indices. We have to know *which* datatype
   is being used.

One thing that is strange about this is that the inner data type does not
have a name. We can write code like this:

    foo : JsonValue -> Bool
    foo v = case v of
      Null -> False
      JsonMap -> case v.value of
        Bin -> True
        Tip -> False

And this should typecheck fine. But if we had to put a type annotation on
`v.value`, we couldn't do it. Maybe we could say that it has this type:

    TextMap(JsonValue)
    ==>
    datatype
      [ Bin Rec$0 Rec$0
      , Tip JsonValue
      ]

No, here's what I think actually has to happen. When we project, the
projection has to rewrite the type. Naively, `v.value` would refer
to a debruijn index that does not exist

    datatype [ Bin Rec$0 Rec$0 , Tip Rec$1 ]

But we can fix this be rewriting `Rec$1`:

    datatype
      [ Bin Rec$0 Rec$0
      , Tip datatype 
        [ Null
        , JsonMap Rec$1
        ]
      ]

If we do this, it makes checking datatypes for equality more difficult. It
also means that datatypes need structural notion of equality, not a nominal
one. Thinking about it now, this seems like it should have been obvious.
If it's possible to create datatypes that don't have names, then we cannot
possibly use nominal equality. This also means that hiding the implementation
of a datatype is not possible. (I think that it's ok to not be able to hide
data constructors.) If you define a datatype with the same constructors and
same field names as another existing type, you can use them interchangeably.

The advantage of this system is that it makes it possible to treat more things
as expressions. That is, types can exist without assignment. The disadvantage
is that compiler error messages and debug symbols might suffer. We really want
to see `List(S64)` in compiler messages, not `datatype [ Cons ..., Nil ]`.

It's interesting that we can recover mutually recursive data types:

    type JsonValue = datatype
      [ Null
      , JsonMap (datatype [ Bin Rec$0 Rec$0 , Tip Rec$1 ] )
      ]
    type TextMapJsonValue = datatype
      [ Bin Rec$0 Rec$0
      , Tip datatype 
        [ Null
        , JsonMap Rec$1
        ]
      ]

But these two types do not actually refer to each other. Perhaps something
similar could be done for mutually recursive functions:

    function group
      { foo(x : S64)(S64) { ... can call bar ... }
      ; bar(x : S64)(S64) { ... can call foo ... }
      ; bar
      }

One difference here is that we need simultaneous binding. We did not need
that for mutually recursive datatype declarations. I don't like this.
Another way to handle mutually recursive functions is to simulate them
with a single function. If the argument is a sum (a tagged union), then
we can use it to choose our path. This is not the greatest solution,
but it does work, and it keeps things simple.
