# Subtyping with Numeric Inequalities

One simple system for refinements types is to allow the type `Integer` to be
refined by inequalities involving constants. For example:

    Int | ?>=0 and ?<=5
    (Int | ?<=100) <: (Int | ?<=200)

Conjunction is both more common and more useful than disjunction here, so I'm
going to focus on this case. We can extend this by:

* Allowing numeric variables (`n` and `m`). If we restrict these to nonnegative
  integers, we get nice subtyping.
* Allowing predicate variables (`p` and `q`).

Notably, we do *not* allow terms to depend on terms. Numeric variables live at
a different level. We have:

    (Int | ? <= n) <: (Int | ? <= n + m)

Let's try typing an `advance` function that increments an array.

    advance : {n : Nat} {m : Nat} -> (Array a | ?.len=n+m) -> (Array a | ?.len=m)
    take    : {n : Nat} {m : Nat} -> (Array a | ?.len=n+m) -> (Array a | ?.len=n)

To call `advance`, we must be able to prove that the index argument is equal
to `n`. For example:

    sum : {m : Nat} -> Int -> (Int | ? = m and ? >= 0) -> (Array Int | ?.len = m) -> Int
    sum accumulator len array = case len of
      0 -> // refined to -> len : (Int | ? = m and ? = 0)
        accumulator
      _ -> // refined to -> len : (Int | ? = m and ? >= 1)
        sum (accumulator + head array) (len - 1) (advance {1} {_} array)

Unfortunately, this does not work. In the wildcard branch, the type of `array`
does not get refined, so we do not learn anything about its length. We could
instead have a system with light dependent types:

    sum : {m : Nat} -> Int -> (Array Int | ?.len = m) -> Int
    sum m accumulator array = case decrement m of
      0 -> // Substitute m=0 into all types
        accumulator
      n ->
        // Substitute m=n+1 into all types
        // array : (Array Int | ?.len = n + 1)
        // ==>
        // array : (Array Int | ?.len => n + 1 and ?.len <= n + 1)
        // The call to advance expects that array : (Array Int | ?.len >= 1)
        // Since (Array Int | ?.len >= n + 1) <: (Array Int | ?.len >= 1),
        // this typechecks.
        sum (accumulator + head array) (len - 1) (advance {1} {n} array 1)

This works out nicely. It does, however, require dependent types. The type of
`m` cannot be refined in any way, and it cannot be related to other naturals.
There must be some mechanism to promote an integer so that it can be used
in this way. And only integers known to be nonnegative can be promoted. But
promotion would cause you to lose any other refinements to the integer.

Let's look some other functions:

    index : {ix : Nat} -> (Array a | ?.len >= ix + 1) -> a
    OR
    index : {n : Nat} -> (ix : Nat | ix >= 0 and ix <= n - 1) -> (Array a | ?.len = n) -> a
    ---
    copy :
         {srcIx : Nat} {dstIx : Nat} {len : Nat}
      -> Array a | ?.len >= srcIx + len
      -> MutArray a | ?.len >= dstIx + len
      -> MutArray a | ?.len = len
    OR
    copy : // no slicing
         {len : Nat}
      -> Array a | ?.len >= len
      -> MutArray a | ?.len >= len
      -> MutArray a | ?.len = len

That worked out nicely. What doesn't work? The `midpoint` function. We want to
convey that the result is between the arguments. But it is difficult to
communicate this:

    midpoint : {n : Nat} -> {start : Nat} -> (Int | ? = start + n) -> (Int | ? >= start and ? <= start + n)

This is correct, but it's awful to use, and there is an odd asymmetry between
the way that the start and end are represented. And promoting the result
would lose important information. The better way to handle this in our system
would be a special construct:

    case half n of // actually half and succ combined
      0,c -> // {c : Nat [0,1]) n = c
      m,c ->
        // {m : Nat} {c : Nat [0,1]} n = m + m + c + 2
        // We can index into an array of length n (that is, m + m + c)
        // with m because 
        // (Array a | ?.len >= m + m + c + 1) <: (Array a | ?.len >= m + 1)

This requires some kind of "bounded nat" type, but the boundedness of `c` is
not needed in the above example. It would only become important if we wanted
to scrutinize `c`. Let's try using the `half` construct:

    // Assume that type A has an inequality relation
    findInSorted : {sz : Nat} -> A -> (Array A | ?.len = sz) -> Option (Int | ? >= 0 and ? <= sz)
    findInSorted sz needle array = case half sz of
      0,c -> case c of
        0 -> None
        1 -> case compare needle (index array 0) of
          Eq -> Some 0
          _ -> None
      m,c -> // {m : Nat} {c : Nat [0,1]} n = m + m + c + 2
        midVal = index {m+1} array 
        case compare needle midVal of
          Eq -> Some midVal
          Lt -> findInSorted (m+1) needle (take (m+1) array)
          Gt -> case findInSorted m needle (advance (m+1) (m+c+1) array) of
            Some ix -> Some (ix + m + 1)
            None -> None

This works, but it's not tail recursive. We need to keep the original size
around:

    findInSorted : {prologue : Nat} {epilogue : Nat} {sz : Nat}
      -> A -> (Array A | ?.len = sz) -> Option (Int | ? >= 0 and ? <= prologue + epilogue + sz)
    findInSorted prologue epilogue sz needle array = case half sz of
      0,c -> case c of
        0 -> None
        1 -> case compare needle (index array 0) of
          Eq -> Some prologue
          _ -> None
      m,c -> // {m : Nat} {c : Nat [0,1]} n = m + m + c + 2
        midVal = index {m+1} array 
        case compare needle midVal of
          Eq -> Some midVal
          Lt -> findInSorted prologue (epilogue + m + c + 1) (m+1) needle (take (m+1) array)
          Gt -> findInSorted (prologue + m + c + 1) epilogue (m + c + 1) needle (advance (m+1) (m+c+1) array)

A difficulty is that we cannot use the result with `advance` or `drop`. We
could try instead having a return type of

    Option ({pre : Nat}, {post : Nat}, proof : (prologue + epilogue + sz = pre + post))
    OR
    Option ({pre : Nat}, {post : Nat}, proof : (sz = pre + post - prologue - epilogue))

The user could guide substitution with a case-like statement. The outer call
to `findInSorted` has `prologue=0` and `epilogue=0`, so the actual type would
be:

    Option ({pre : Nat}, {post : Nat}, proof : (sz = pre + post))

This substitution is exactly what we need to be able to call `advance` or `take`.

I think that the trick to making this system work is:

* Use naturals for anything dealing with arrays. Sizes, indices, all of it.
  Slice into arrays when possible.
* We cannot express inequalities between naturals, so instead of talking about
  `n` and `m` where `n >= m`, we have to talking about `m` and `c` where `n = m + c`.
  The means sometimes introducing variables that do not exist at runtime. For
  example, in the above example `epilogue` should not exist at runtime. I do
  not think that it is important to track relevance in the type system.

One weird issue is what to do about negative constants and coefficients. We
certainly don't want to be able to assign negative values to natural variables.
So there is this kind of weird thing going on where we might not be able to
instantiate a natural variable with an expression like `m - n` because that
might be a negative number. Let's revisit the type of `index`:

    index : {n : Nat} -> (ix : Nat | ix >= 0 and ix <= n - 1) -> (Array a | ?.len = n) -> a
    CHANGE TO
    index : {ix : Nat} {m : Nat} -> (Array a | ?.len = ix + m + 1) -> a

This no longer requires a negative number. Good. What about the proof term earlier
that had `prologue + epilogue + sz = pre + post` in it? Having multiple variables
on each side of an equality makes substitution difficult. Let's try something else:

    findInSorted : {prologue : Nat} {epilogue : Nat} {sz : Nat} {completeSz : Nat}
      -> (completeSz = prologue + epilogue + sz)
      -> A
      -> (Array A | ?.len = sz)
      -> Option ({pre : Nat}, {post : Nat}, proof : (completeSz = pre + post))

We introduced another natural variable to break up the equality into
two much more usable equalities.

This system is able to express more than I realized that it could, which is
nice. Maybe there's a way forward for it after all.
