# Language without Representation Polymorphism

The high-level language that has no representation polymorphism still needs
to understand what width and signedness are:

    min : (n : Nat | >=1) -> Array n (Integer s w) -> Integer s w

It is probably better to write `min` with modules, but it is possible to write
an integer-only verison of it. Comparison functions (and things derived from
them, like `min`) can be understood as parametricly polymorphic. But addition,
either with wrapping semantics or crashing semantics, cannot. So we need addition
to restricted:

    add[Signed][8] : Integer Signed 8 -> Integer Signed 8 -> Integer Signed 8
    add[Signed][16] : Integer Signed 16 -> Integer Signed 16 -> Integer Signed 16

# SAML Much Easier Than Expected

I started working on a SAML integration today and discovered that SAML is
much more simple than I imagined it was. I'm not sure why I always thought
it would be awful, but it's actually simple. It is very similar to OAuth.
You have to understand what all of these things mean:

* Base64 encoding
* Deflate (raw deflate, not the formats built on top of it)
* URLs
* Query Strings (the thing after the question mark in a URL)
* HTTP request methods (GET and POST)
* HTTP redirection (status code 3xx)
* Digital signing (to prevent tampering with payload)
* Identity provider (IP) vs service provider (SP)
* What a "reply url" is and how to manage the "reply url" list in
  your identity provider.

The flow is this:

* Client navigates to SP in web brower.
* SP redirects client to IP. This redirect includes the following query
  string parameters as a way to pass information to the IP:
    * `SAMLRequest`: xml + raw deflate compression + base64 encode + querystring encode
    * `RelayState`: Can be anything. The IP is just going to echo this
      back in a future response.

