I thought some more about cycle detection on algebraic graphs.
What I am about to describe in all in the context of interpreting
the graphs as undirected. Handling directed graphs might be possible
as well, but I don't see a straightforward adaptation of the algorithm
I discuss below. Let's specialize the graph type a little bit.

    data Graph
      = Empty
      | Vertex Int
      | Overlay Graph Graph -- (+)
      | Connect Graph Graph -- (->)

In this variant, vertices can only be labelled by integers. How do
we detect cycles? A fruitless line of thought I went down was the
idea of coming up with some type `C` where it would be possible
to having `cyclelessMetadata :: Graph -> Maybe C`. Then when you
hit `Overlay` or `Connect`, you could run the algorithm on both
sides and then compose the results in some way. The problem is
that I have no idea what `C` should look like. How can we
maintain the right information in a way that composes cheaply and
tells us after each composition whether or not a cycle was
dectected? I do not know. Keep in mind that the standard DFS-based
algorithm is `O(V + E)`. It was be nice to have an algorithm that
with the same time complexity, assuming that users don't duplicate
information with silly expressions like `G + G`.

Abandoning the compositional approach mentioned above, I turned to
a different thought. What about something that operates more like
a fold, folding a single edge at a time into an accumulator. First
let's establish that such an accumulator exists. We need a variant
of a [disjoint-set data structure](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Disjoint_sets)
that augments each set with a value. The disjoint-set data structure
implies linear use (and consequently `ST`), but this is fine since
we are only using the accumulator internally. For example:

- `{1,7,12}`: `[(1,12),(7,12)]`
- `{2,5}`: `[(2,5)]`
- `{6}`: `[]`
- `{8,9}`: `[(8,9)]`

The disjoint sets are vertices that comprise SCCs. The values are
the edges. The cardinality of the edge list is always one less than
the cardinality of the keys. If the edge cardinality would ever
become equal to the key cardinality, a cycle has been detected.
The complexity of `union` in a disjoint sets data structure is
`O(1)`, but the complexity of updating the value by inserting a
pair is `O(log E)`. So, a user should expect to pay `O(V * log E)`
to build this. More expensive than I'd like, but maybe there are
ways to bring this cost down. I'll worry about that later.

Next, let's think about the act of folding in an edge. The crucial
insight here is that `->` (connect) only makes acyclic graphs under
very restricted circumstances, and these acyclic graphs have a very
restricted form. I argue that `A -> B` (in the undirected interpretation,
equivalent to `B -> A`) will only ever be acyclic when, in addition
to `V(A) ∩ V(B)` (needed to prevent self loops), one of these holds:

    card(A) == 0 ==> is_acyclic(B)     // Pass through
    card(B) == 0 ==> is_acyclic(A)     // Pass through
    card(A) == 1 ==> edge_card(B) == 0 // Bag of edges
    card(B) == 1 ==> edge_card(A) == 0 // Bag of edges

In either of the "bag of edges" cases, we will fold all edges
onto the disjoint-set key-value accumulator. In the "pass through"
cases, on of the arguments was the empty graph so we just ignore it.

Here is how we perform the folding. When we encounter an `Overlay`,
we handle the left-hand side first. Then we move on to the right-hand
side, feeding it the new accumulator that resulted from handling the
left-hand side. When we encounter a `Connect`, we have to look at the
children to check for any of the four special cases listed above.
When we encounter an `Empty`, we ignore it. When we encounter a
`Vertex`, we simply insert that number into the disjoint-set data
structure with no edges associated with it.

I think this should work. It just requires an implementation of
that disjoint-sets variant. I wonder if that `O(V * log E)` can
be brought down to `O(V + E)`. Oh, here's an idea. What if we
build those edge sets as cons-lists instead. And then we could
just sort and dedupe when the cardinality of the list became
equal to the cardinality of the key set corresponding to it.
In common case without duplicate edges, this would never happen,
so the complexity would be `O(V + E)`.
