# Off-Heap Object Formats and Modularity

In the entry on 2020-12-02, I presented a solution for off-heap storage
of large amounts on static data. It has two different code reuse problems:

1. Different library authors have to coordinate offset reservations.
   There is a large address space that can be shared, and few people
   would use this feature, so I am not really concerned about this
   issue.
2. Data constructors need stable identifiers. GHC calls these identifiers
   `StgInfoTable`, but the idea is just that the first word of any heap
   object must identify it.

This second problem is difficult to deal with. We want identifiers to be
pointers (or offsets), not just numbers, so that a GC can follow them
without penalty. But how can these offsets be stable? Library authors
could provide them, but reservations would need to be in a smaller range.
They could inadverdently cause the info table section to be padded if
there was a data constructor whose reserved offset was high enough
(and if the program did not use many types). Reservations could
not be made for data constructors defined in indefinite modules (if there
were a module system). Neither could reservations be made for data
constructors of levity polymorphic types. Well, they could, but the
author of the type would need to spell out every expected instatiation
that might show up in an off-heap object.

I am aware of one alternative. It is possible to simply omit the identifiers
in off-heap objects. The identifiers are needed by the GC, not by the
generated application code. The GC will already need to be instructed to
not follow object references in off-heap reagions, so there you go.
Not so fast. Profiling tools, including tools for heap visualization,
might still want this information. Without it, they could not follow
references into off-heap memory.

I'm leaning in the direction of just omitting identifiers in off-heap objects
since that does solve the problem nicely. Profiling tools usually wouldn't
need to follow these, but if they did, it is probably possible to do a
special build of the `mmap`ped file that provides all those identifiers.

Oh nevermind, there is a slightly better way. The object in the `mmap`ped
file could include local identifiers (pointers to objects in the file itself).
These would be ignored by GC, but a profiling tool would follow them. At load time,
everything in this local table would get checked to make sure that it had a
matching (identical) entry in the application's table. I think this solves
all the issues.

One thing that library authors might still need to specify is a tag for
every data constructor. These need to be stable across builds. They might
not need to specify these since the compiler could just assign the tags
in order. But if the compiler did that, then library authors would need
to be aware that reordering data constructors is a breaking change. Well,
only if you are expecting people to use your data types in off-heap storage.
But, this breakage would be detected at load time, so it's not like you
would just start getting segfaults.
