# Managed Objects in Off-Heap Mapped Memory

I read an enlightening article from Eli Berderski,
[Understanding the x64 code models](https://eli.thegreenplace.net/2012/01/03/understanding-the-x64-code-models),
yesterday. It doesn't really help with the problem I'm thinking about today,
but it's worth a read.

A recurring problem I've seen in managed language is a poor interaction
between off-heap storage and objects. The problem is that if you take
any language with managed objects (GHC Haskell, Python, Java, etc.) and
try to serialize a giant (multiple gigabytes) table of these to a file
that will later be `mmap`ped, you have to rewrite all the code that
operates on those objects. Let us consider a simple case:

    data Person = Person
      { name :: Text
      , age :: Int
      , height :: Int
      }

Ignore laziness and thunks, and pretend that we are working in a strict
variant of Haskell. If `Person` only had non-pointer fields, everything
would be fine. You could store a billion `Person` objects in an `mmap`ped
region, and then have a function to look them up by index. No language
that I'm aware of actually lets you do this, but it would work by teaching
the garbage collector that certain regions are ineligible for collection.
This is similar to how GHC's compact regions are implemented. However,
it all starts to fall apart once objects can contain pointers to other
objects. Note that we are talking here about pointing to other objects
in the regions, not pointing outside of it. Pointing outside of it is
impossible. GHC's compact regions works around this issue with the
`compactFixupPointers#` primop. But this means that the memory is not
actually backed by the file anymore, which is a shame. The analogous
linker feature is called load-time relocation.
In [Position Independent Code (PIC) in shared libraries](https://eli.thegreenplace.net/2011/11/03/position-independent-code-pic-in-shared-libraries/),
Berderski describes the non-sharing problem:

> Load-time relocation has a couple of problems: it takes time to
> perform, and it makes the text section of the library non-shareable.
> ...
> Second, the non-shareable text section problem, which is somewhat
> more serious. One of the main points of having shared libraries in
> the first place, is saving RAM. Some common shared libraries are used
> by multiple applications. If the text section (where the code is) of
> the shared library can only be loaded into memory once (and then mapped
> into the virtual memories of many processes), considerable amounts of
> RAM can be saved. But this is not possible with load-time relocation,
> since when using this technique the text section has to be modified at
> load-time to apply the relocations. Therefore, for each application that
> loaded this shared library, it will have to be wholly placed in RAM
> again. Different applications won't be able to really share it.

Of course, PIC is the solution in the context of linkers. But PIC only
solves the issue of sharing code, not data. What if we just have a
bunch of read-only data with pointers to other read-only data, and we want
to be able to follow these pointers just like we follow ordinary pointers?
PIC doesn't cut it. In PIC, all global variable references go through the
Global Offset Table (GOT). That is, a variable's provenance changes codegen
for reading it (the GOT adds an indirection), which would be a problem in a
language where pointers are expected to be treated uniformly.

So what can we do? We cannot use absolute addresses because we don't know
where the objects will be loaded. So we have to use an offset instead.
This means that in all ordinary heap objects, we also need to use offsets.
But, crucially, these are only represented as offsets when pointers are
stored in objects on the heap. Once loaded, they must be immidiately
resolved to absolute addresses. How can they be resolved? We need a base
address. What is the base? We cannot use the same base address everywhere,
but if we do not do that, then uniform pointer treatment is out the window.
We need a better plan.

One terrible solution would be to just have each type of shared memory data
reserve a certain offset window. If you ever need to load two of these that
have the same window, game over. This is not a good solution, but it would
make it possible to just use the same base address everywhere. You would
need to `mmap` a giant (at least 2^40 bytes) area with `PROT_NONE`, check
all the data files to ensure that there was no offset conflict, and then
`mmap` each data file read-only at its appropriate position in the giant
area. This solution makes me sad, but it would probably work well in practice,
Also, if we do the base-offset thing, then we could store stuff in the upper
bits of all the offsets without making LLVM angry. There may not be any
purpose in doing that though. Nullary data constructors could be trivially
recognized without following the pointer since the offset would be statically
known. Kind of nice.

One final thought. I realized after going over this afterwards that the
base-offset option is the only way to be able to embed compile-time-known data
in the `rodata` section. Absolute addresses cannot be used. So, one way or
another, offsets must be used in place of addresses in all heap objects.
