# Complete and Easy Join Points

The entry on 2020-10-30 covered typechecking let bindings with
Complete and Easy. I've been worked on extending this to GHC-style
join points.
[Compiling without Continuations](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/wp-content/uploads/2016/11/join-points-pldi17.pdf)
establishes a type system for working with join points. Notably,
this type system includes two contexts, one for join point bindings, and
one for normal bindings (i.e. `LET` and `VAR` bindings). On its face, this
poses a difficulty for Complete and Easy. Complete and Easy relies on an
ordered context. When there are two contexts, everything is not ordered
any more. But, if we look at the purpose of System Fj's two contexts,
we find that it is to reset the join point context at certain points in
time. That is, its purpose is to control scope. For example, consider the
expression `E` in

    join f x = ...
    in myFunc E

The expression `E` cannot refer to `f` because `f` is not in scope at
position `E` (rule `APP` in Figure 2).

Because of this, I think it is possible to cheat a little. It should be
possible to add join points to Complete and Easy without splitting up
the context. If the context is not split up, then we lose all of the
context resets required for the correctness of join points. But here's
the trick: Since the context resets are only a scoping trick to begin
with, they can be checked as part of a separate pass. That is, before
typechecking, perform a join point scope check. This scope check does
nothing with types, and it doesn't need to because context reset are
entirely syntax directed. This pass just needs to make sure that jumps
do not refer to join points that are not available.

Also, one unrelated thing. Join points are particularly important for
tail recursion, so I've been working specifically on recursive join
points in nosk. For recursive bindings, I'm just requiring the arguments
and the return type to be annotated by the programmer. Certainly, there
is a way to infer these in the monomorphic case, but I'm not up to
figuring it out yet. For Complete and Easy, this just means that when
I go to typecheck the binding, I dump all of them into the context
(with complete type signatures), then check them all, then check
the body, then split the context where the first join point in the
group and throw away this and everything after it.
