# Separating Functions and Data

Here's an idea for a type system. Here are well-typed expressions:

    5 : Int
    Int : Data
    (\ (x : Char) -> 12) : Char -> Int
    (Char -> Int) : Function
    (\x -> 12) : forall (a :: Data). a -> Int
    (\\y -> \x -> y x) : forall (a : Data) (b : Data). (a -> b) => a -> b
    (let ap = (\\y -> \x -> y x) in ap (\x -> x + 2) 3) : Int

Here are ill-typed expressions:

    (\a -> \b -> b) // Return type of function must be data

Let's try to write out some judgements and stuff. I'll just try the monomorphic
setting first:

    T :- o : Data  T :- t : Data    T :- e1 : o -> t     T :- e2 : o
    ----------------------------------------------------------------   value application
                     T :- e1 e2 : t

    T :- t : Data    T,o:Data,x:o :- e : t
    --------------------------------------   value abstraction
         T :- (\x : o. e) : (o -> t)


    T :- o : Function  T :- t : Function    T :- e1 : o => t     T :- e2 : o
    ------------------------------------------------------------------------   function application
                     T :- e1 @e2 : t

    T :- t : Function   T,o:Function,x:o :- e : t
    ---------------------------------------------   function abstraction
         T :- (\\x : o. e) : (o => t)

    T :- a : Data   T :- b : Data
    -------------------------------   function kind A
       T :- (a -> b) : Function

    T :- a : Function   T :- b : Function
    -------------------------------------   function kind B
       T :- (a => b) : Function

Notice that knowing that `f : Function` does not tell us anything useful about
it. It could use either arrow. I do not think this is a problem. All types of
kind `Function` cannot depend on runtime data. That is the real thing that
they have in common.

    map  : (a -> b) => List a -> List b
    map = \\f -> let rec go = (\xs -> ...) in go

    fold : ((b,a) -> b) => (b,List a) -> b

    sum : List Int -> Int
    sum = \xs -> fold @(\(x,y) -> x + y) (0,xs)

    countUpper : List Char -> Int
    countUpper = \xs -> fold (\(acc,c) -> if c >= 'A' && c <= 'Z' then acc + 1 else acc) (0,xs)

I found this on the Internet somewhere:

    {x: τ1} + Γ |- e1:τ1  {x: τ1} + Γ |- e2:τ2
    ------------------------------------------
        Γ |- (let rec x = e1 in e2 ): τ2

Recursion poses a small issue for us. We want to allow recursive functions but
not recursive data. Also, recursively defined functions need to be of type
`a -> b`. They cannot use the big arrow. The `x` in `lec rec`'s definition
needs to be a zero-order function. That's all. That's not so bad. So maybe
`let rec` would be typed:

    T :- a : Data  T :- b : Data    T,f:(a -> b) :- e1:(a -> b)
    -----------------------------------------------------------   recursive function (unsound)
                T :- ( def rec f = e1 ) : (a -> b)

    T :- a : Data  T :- b : Data  T :- c : Data  T,f:(a -> b) :- e1:(a -> b)   T :- e2 : c
    --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------   local recursive function
                            T :- ( let rec f = e1 in e2 ) : c

Notice that we need two variants of `let rec`. The first one is needed so that
functions like `map` can be defined. And really, it isn't even powerful enough.
It cannot express mutual recursion. The two different functions arise from the
need to ensure that we do not return a function that closes over runtime data.
Actually, the first construction, `def rec` does not actually provide this
guarantee. It is unsound. We want the function in `def rec` only be allowed
to close over values with `Function` types, not values with `Data` types. Come
to think of it, how does lambda lifting work with recursion in this setting?
If we write a `let rec` that creates a function, how can we hoist it up to
the top level? It might close over runtime data. Hoisting those up as function
arguments seems tricky. We need a better rule. I hate rules that talk about
closing over things though. Maybe we could instead make the notion of a
top-level function explicit in the rules. We want to communicate: "you can
have function arguments, constant data, and data that changes as you recurse,
but the function arguments cannot change". That's a mouthful. Actually, maybe
I'm making this too complicated. I think we can get away with this:

    T :- a : Data  T :- b : Data  T :- c : Data  T :- arg : c   T,f:(a -> b) :- e1:(a -> b)
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------   recursive function
                T :- ( def rec f {arg} = e1 ) : (a -> b)

This pins an environment argument during the recursion. Anything pulled out
for lambda lifting would go here. To give an example:

    incrementAllBy : (Int,List Int) -> List Int
    incrementAllBy = \(a,xs) -> def rec go {a} = \xs -> ...

The end user would never need to explicitly list the environment arguments.
An internal IR would rewrite all recursive functions to avoid closing over
any free variables, listing the free variables as one big argument tuple.
Maybe we do not even really need to have this be part of the typing rules.
What about mutual recursion though? That is still a glaring problem. With
the `def rec` rule, we are able to ensure that a recursive function cannot
change a function argument as it recurses (its argument must be data).
The best option I am aware of is to do something like this:

    mutual recursion block (Int => Bool) Text:
      fooA : (Int => Bool) => (Text,List Int) -> Bool
      fooB : (Int => Bool) => (Text,(List Int,Char)) -> Bool
      fooC : (Int => Bool) => (Text,(List Int,List Int)) -> Bool

All functions in the block would be required to take the same function
argument and the same environment argument. They could not change it as they
called one another. So you would get a specialization of the block for each
function argument that you provided. There are other ways to expose this
syntactically to the user, but essentially, they are all the same thing.
The rule is something like this:

    T :- c : Data   T :- arg : c
    T :- a1 : Data  T :- b1 : Data  T,f:(a1 -> b1) :- e1:(a1 -> b1)
    T :- a2 : Data  T :- b2 : Data  T,f:(a2 -> b2) :- e2:(a2 -> b2)
    ...
    ---------------------------------------------------------------   mutually recursive functions
                T :- ( def rec f {arg} = e1 ) : (a1 -> b1)
                T :- ( def rec f {arg} = e2 ) : (a2 -> b2)
                ...

Here however, it would sometimes be necessary for the programmer to provide
the argument explicitly. In a local declaration of mutually recursive
functions, this would not be needed (the compiler could figure it out).
However, at the top level, the programmer needs some way to communicate
that environment does not change across invocations. Being forced to
add it to the value that changes at every step would be no good.

One thing that I have not touched on is that HOFs can accept other HOFs
as arguments under the proposed type system. For example:

    // Modify the increment function before applying it to argument
    foo : ((Int -> Int) => (Int -> Int)) => Int -> Int
    foo = \\f -> \x -> f @(\y -> y + 1) x
