# Problem With Zero-Order System F

I've been playing around with a zero-order System F lately where all HOF
are compiled to zero-order functions at some point during compilation.
I've come across a problem. Suppose we have:

    map : (a -> b) => List a -> List b
    map = \\f -> \x0 ->
      rec go = \x -> case x of
            Nil -> Nil
            Cons y ys -> Cons (f y) (go ys)
       in go x0
    foo : <List Int,Int> -> List Int
    foo = \<xs,i> ->
      let f = \x -> bar i x
       in map f xs

We want to lambda lift `f`, but doing this would give us a top-level function
that takes `<Int,Int>` as its argument. This is no longer suitable for `map`.
So, we actually need to inline `map` first, giving us:

    foo : <List Int,Int> -> List Int
    foo = \<xs,i> ->
      let f = \x -> bar i x
      rec go = \x -> case x of
            Nil -> Nil
            Cons y ys -> Cons (f y) (go ys)
       in go xs

Then we can inline `f` into `go`:

    foo : <List Int,Int> -> List Int
    foo = \<xs,i> ->
      rec go = \x -> case x of
            Nil -> Nil
            Cons y ys -> Cons (bar i y) (go ys)
       in go xs

And now we could lambda lift `go`, although there is no point in doing that
since `foo` and `go` are the same function at this point.

This translation worked fine in this particular setting, but I am not able
to say whether or not it would always work. That is, is it always possible
to inline a locally defined helper function? We want to be able to do to
avoid the need to jump to unknown places. And it's nice to be able to avoid
having to build closures. I suspect that this always works. The algorithm
is roughly:

1. Inline all functions that have compulsory unfoldings (includes all HOF).
   Repeatedly do this since one HOF may be defined in terms of another.
2. Inline locally defined functions into their use sites.
3. Lambda lift.

I think this always works, but I'm not sure. We cannot lambda lift anything
that takes a function as an argument, but steps 1 and 2 ensure that there
cannot be any locally defined functions.
