# Conservative Garbage Collection Gripe

A fundamental problem with conservative GC, one that is occassionally
alluded to in the literature, is its incompatibility with compiler
optimizations. Any GC needs to treat pointers in the stack as roots.
But, C compilers make no guarantees about whether or not "base pointers"
or "derived pointers" show up in stack frames. Consider (not valid C):

    struct myobj {
      int64_t cat;
      int64_t dog;
      int64_t frog;
    }
    int foo(int x) {
      myobj* y = malloc ...
      y->dog = 55;
      callSomeFunction();
      y->frog = 42;
      return ((y->dog) + (y->frog))
    }

What keeps `y` live during `callSomeFunction`? Of course, it's the fact
the `y` exists in a stack frame. But how sure are we of this? If `y`
ends up at address 0xABCD0000, then `y->cat` would be at that same address,
`y->dog` would be at 0xABCD0008, and `y->frog` would be at 0xABCD0010. Why
should the compiler put the "base pointer" (`y`) in the stack frame?
By putting the address of `y->dog` in there instead, the compiler could
avoid an addition instruction. And that's what a good optimizing compiler
should do.

If your conservative GC can figure out base pointers from derived (interior)
pointers, then this particular example wouldn't necessarily break the GC.

# Shadow Stack for Garbage Collection

One tricky part of precise garbage collection is that you have to be able
to traverse all the stack frames when GC happens. This presents two big asks:

1. The format of every stack frame must be exposed to the GC in some
   way. LLVM has stack maps, GHC has [layout bitmaps](https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/wikis/commentary/rts/storage/stack).
   Everyone's got to have something for this.
2. Only base pointers can be pushed onto the stack. LLVM has statepoints
   (unclear whether or not these are used in non-toy projects, might have
   bugs). In GHC, Cmm knows about a `gcptr` type.

Basically, you need tight control over the stack. A shadow stack is a
lower-performance workaround that doesn't require this kind of control.
Note: there is a security thing called a shadow stack and a GC thing
called a shadow stack. They are similar but have completely different
purposes. LLVM can allegedly do GC shadow stacks, but it is not clear
if anyone uses this feature. 


Henderson has a [good paper](https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.87.3769&rep=rep1&type=pdf)
that shows how to use a shadow stack for accurate GC in C. Page 3
has a good skeleton code example. In Henderson's work, the shadow
stack holds entire objects, not just pointers. In section 2.3, he
discusses a number of useful optimizations, most of which were not
included in his proof-of-concept implementation.

From the paper:

> The basic idea is to put all local variables that might contain pointers
> in structs, with one struct for each stack frame, and chain these structs
> together as a linked list.

Local variables are reloaded from memory after any possibly-GC-performing
function is called. Rather neatly, this avoids the issue of duplicating
data across the stack and the shadow stack.

In the paper, the shadow stack is linked. I do not think this is necessary.
I believe that it should be possible for the shadow stack to just be a big
stack of pointers with no additional metadata.

With a nonmoving collector, you could skip the reload step after each
function call, but this seems unlikely to actually improve performance.
If the callee blows out all the registers, then you are going to have
to restore it anyway, so pointers would just end up getting pushed to
the stack and then loaded back into registers from there.

Thinking specifically about building this on top of LLVM without using
LLVM's shadow stacks, the main issue I forsee is that LLVM will not
understand what the shadow stack is, leading to missed optimization
opportunities. For example, if a callee is inlined into the caller,
then any shadow-stack setup that the caller had done is unnecessary.
And the reloads are not needed either. One possibly-mitigating factor
is that non-allocating functions cannot trigger GC and consequently
do not require shadow-stack setup.
