# Nonmoving Subset

What if a language's nonmoving objects (intended for interop with C) all
had types of a special kind. This kind would have several important
behaviors:

* Objects are not moved
* Objects are not tagged (C cannot handle the tags)
* Polymorphism over types of this special kind is disallowed

The third restriction, disallowing polymorphism, is needed to make it
easy for tagless garbage collection to collection to work. Rather than
trying to use Goldberg's tagless GC scheme, I think it's easier to
just prohibit polymorphism in this fragment of the language. C does not
allow polymorphism, and the whole point of this feature is interop with C.
Let's consider UNIX's `msghdr` and `iovec`:

    struct msghdr {
        void         *msg_name;       /* optional address */
        socklen_t     msg_namelen;    /* size of address */
        struct iovec *msg_iov;        /* scatter/gather array */
        size_t        msg_iovlen;     /* number of elements in msg_iov */
        void         *msg_control;    /* ancillary data, see below */
        size_t        msg_controllen; /* ancillary data buffer len */
        int           msg_flags;      /* flags on received message */
    };
    struct iovec {
        void  *iov_base;    /* Starting address */
        size_t iov_len;     /* Number of bytes to transfer */
    };

These definitions are cribbed from the Linux man pages. The `void*` arguments
that these structs accept vary in meaning. For example, `iov_base` is just
an array of bytes. The `msg_name` field is actually a `sockaddr*`, which is a
C-style tagged union. And `msg_control` is something with a horribly arcane
interface that I'm going to ignore here. Note that both `sendmsg` and `recvmsg`
both use this same data structure. When receiving, some of these fields are
left empty (and get filled in by the operating system). When sending, none
of them are modified. Also, `sendmsg` ignores `msg_flags`.

Let's handle the easy part first. We can translate `struct iovec` as something
like this:

    data IoVec =
      { base : GcPtr Byte
      , len  : Word64
      }

Now `struct msghdr` will refer to an array of these `IoVec`s.

    data MsgHdr =
      { name : NullableGcPtr Byte
      , nameLen : Word64 
      , iov : GcPtr IoVec
      , iovLen : Word64
      , flags : Word32
      }

Notice the use of `GcPtr`. It means that the garbage collector
understands the structure even though the structure has a C-like
layout. Since all of the data shared with C is allocated into
arenas with size classes, it is possible to scan these heap objects
shared with C. A single reference into the middle of an array must
keep the entire array live.

There is a little more that could be done with the `name` field since
it is actually a tagged union, but it is tricky to get right. Probably
the best thing to do would be to always set `nameLen` to 128 (the
common `_SS_MAXSIZE` value) when receiving, which would guarantee
that truncation of the socket address does not happen. The C-style
tagged union needs to somehow be mapped to something like:

    data SockAddr
      = SockAdderInet4 ...
      | SockAdderInet6 ...
      | SockAdderUnix ...

And `sa_family` is the tag for this union. It's tricky to get this
right though.

So, ignoring the `sockaddr` stuff, how could this interface be used.
We would have something like this:

    sendMyBytesWithHeader : FileDescriptor -> Bytes -> Effect ()
    sendMyBytesWithHeader fd body = do
      -- Precondition of unsafeBytesToGcPtr is that we must promise that
      -- we are not going to modify the bytes, just read them.
      v : GcPtr IOVec <- allocate many IOVec
        [ { base = unsafeBytesToGcPtr prefaceBytes, len = length prefaceBytes }
        , { base = unsafeBytesToGcPtr body, len = length bodyBytes }
        ]
      hdr : GcPtr MsgHdr <- allocate one MsgHdr
        { name = Null
        , nameLen = 0
        , iov = v
        , iovLen = 2
        , flags = 0
        }
      let loop = do
            totalSent <- sendMsg fd hdr 0
            if ... totalSent ...
              then pure ()
              else do
                ...
                loop
      loop

The loop is just one of the necessary evils of `sendmsg`. Importantly, this loop
can modify `hdr` directly, bumping the `iov` pointer when neccessary. Also, it
can modify the `base` byte pointers inside of the `IoVec` elements. This is
very important for handling short writes. Also, notice that we do not need a
`touch` function to keep things live. The garbage collector can follow all
the pointers in `hdr`.

One interesting design consideration here is that `allocate many` must
initialize pointer fields. In the example above, this does not need to
happen because we directly provide all the elements. But if we were going
to create an array of unknown length, we would probably need to zero
everything out first. This would mean that all pointers are actually
nullable. The `NullableGcPtr` distinction might not be that useful, given
that it is impossible to enforce.

Something implied by this scheme is that `Bytes` is always pinned. For other,
more structured data, we can have two universes: tagged vs untagged, copying
vs nonmoving, polymorphic vs monomorphic, etc. Pinned objects that are shared
with C cannot refer to unpinned objects. C cannot handle the unpinned ones.
But going in the other direction is fine. Unpinned objects can talk about
pinned ones. And this is important because `Bytes` needs to unconditionally
be a pinned object. GHC tried to have it both ways and the result has been
a disaster. Most `ByteArray#` objects on GHC heaps are pinned, and this happens
because `bytestring` wants them to be pinned, and they have to be pinned
because you never know when you're doing to have to pass something over to C.
Here, I think simpler would be better. Always pin them. Since `Bytes` has to
be able to bridge this gap, `Bytes` must be unusual. It needs to have a tag
so that it can be used in a polymorphic setting. But it must live in the
pinned heap. And `unsafeBytesToGcPtr` just moves past the tag to give us the
pointer that a C library wants. So `Bytes` would actually have the same
kinds as pinned boxed objects.

Keep in mind that "mutable data to share with C" and "mutable data not to
share with C" are totally different. In the first set of data types, we
are trying to be super careful to match the way that C represents data.
In the second set of data types, we do not care about that. The data we
share we C is mutable because that's just how C treats everything. There
is no real point trying to draw a distinction between mutable and immutable
data because it would just complicate APIs. The goal is just to make it easy
for someone familiar with the POSIX API to use it.

Also, what about freeing the data? A garbage collector could reclaim it
automatically, so it does not need to be freed explicitly. It would be
a bad idea to keep a large number of these around for a long period of
time. Anything that may point to `Bytes` must always be treated as a GC
root for minor collections. Minor collections could become expensive if
there were too many GC-managed C objects. If the C object has no `GcPtr Byte`
fields (transitively), then it might be able to be skipped during nursery
collections, but I'm not really sure how that should work. 

As a tangentially related thought, I've realized that
mutable-points-to-immutable is not always bad. It's only a problem when the
immutable field can change. For example:

    mutable Node =
      { count : mut Int
      , name  : String
      , left  : mut Node
      , right : mut Node
      }

If `name` cannot change, then a `Node` cannot point to a `name` in a
younger generation. No, that's not really correct though. An old `Node`
could point to a new `Node`, and that would transitively cause an old-to-new
pointer.

If mutable objects have region-like behavior, that is, if they are all
freed together at the end of some scope, and if all immutable data is
allocated by a nonmoving collector, then what we could do with `Node` is
mark `name` when `Node` is allocated. This technique was described in the
entry on 2020-12-22, but at that time, I was only thinking about mutable
objects. It should be possible target immutable data as well, provided that
the pointers to immutable data cannot change after initialization.
Additionally, any referenced immutable data could not be moved by the GC.
It might be sufficient for only `Bytes` to have this special status.
Distinguishing between immutable and mutable `Bytes` is important because
it impacts the soundness of slicing. For other objects, using a mutable
variant when immutable would suffice is still sad, but it hurts you in
fewer ways. (I think.)

I should also think about arrays of other non-pointer types. They should be
treated like `Bytes`.

What about arrays of boxed pointers? For these, we will always have to
point to the beginning of the array and stash the length there. This is
what GHC does. Trying to preserve just a slice with a copying collector
will be difficult. The copying collection algorithms do not like it
when you slice into objects. It needs to be all-or-none. So, a general-purpose
fold function needs to be written in a way that does not bump the base
address of the array at each step. But, arrays of non-pointer types
(handled by nonmoving collector) will support an additional function
that allows the user to slice into them. This is a weird asymetry though.
Maybe let's not support that additional function. Only once you turn
something in `GcPtr Word16` for C interop can you step through it.

Or perhaps arrays could always be represented as a triple: effective address,
negative offset, remaining length. But that's a pain. Nevermind.
