# Sufficiency of First-Order Functional Programming

Is first-order functional programming enough. That is, what if we
could have the first-order `map` and `fold` but no second-order functions?
Why does this matter? I wonder if it makes any substructural type systems
(linear types, uniqueness types) more simple. It might not though. Maybe
it makes things more complicated. I would like to consider this more another
time.

[The Best of Both Worlds](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1612.06633.pdf) includes
a good explanation of some of the difficulty that arises when integrating
linear types into an intuitionistic type system.

Unrelated thought. In a language with uniqueness types, how can unique values
actually be created. A top-level unique values makes no sense, so certain
kinds of floating must be disallowed. Consider a primitive string builder:

    newBuilder : () -> Builder{Unique}
    freezeBuilder : Builder{Unique} -> Bytes{Nonunique}

This use of unit is strange. Is there a better way to sequence things?
Threading a state token (a la GHC) is an option, but then we will be
right back to `runST`-style scoping. If we are doing that, why not just
use linear types instead? Let's try this with linear types.

    withBuilder : (Builder{Linear} -> Builder{Linear}) -> Bytes

Having to do this is disappointing. Wait, I have another idea for how
to make uniqueness types work out.

    emptyBuilder : Builder{Nonunique}
    deepCopy : a{Nonunique} -> a{Unique}
    example =
      let b0 = deepCopy emptyBuilder
      let b1 = consChar 'x' b0
      ...

To be honest, this is really exactly the same thing as the `newBuilder`
we had before. You could implement `newBuilder` with this function. Maybe
embracing the SML-style "unit as a mechanism for defer" is really the
way to go here. It works, and it is simple.

Uniqueness types would do a pretty good job expressing both string builders
and array builders. When I say "builder", I'm referring to something that
is typically mutable for a short period of time and then frozen in-place.
These show up when parsing all kinds of data.

Since uniqueness types do not exhibit last-in-first-out freezing behavior
than linear types and `runST` imply, there would be some complications
integrating them with the runtime I had envisioned. Perhaps linear types
would be better after all.
