# Compiling ANF with Join Points to LLVM

I worked on this a little more, and here is the solution I have arrived at:

    data Branch = Branch
      ShortText -- destination label
      ShortText -- where we branched from
      [Value] -- arguments
    data PendingBlock = PendingBlock [ShortText] AST.BasicBlock
    data Builder = Builder [PendingBlock] [Jump]
    data Error
    data Context = Returning | Branching ShortText
    compile ::
         ShortText -- Pending label, reader-like
      -> [ShortText] -- Pending argument names for phi nodes at beginning of block, reader-like
      -> [AST.Named AST.Instruction] -- Pending instructions, writer-like
      -> Context -- Which LLVM instruction will the terminator be: ret or br
      -> Expr -- Expression, the thing actually being compiled
      -> Either Error Builder

`Builder` is important. We need to be able to compile child expressions
that may add more blocks. When we compile a child expression, it must
result in blocks that are nearly complete. What does nearly complete
mean? It means that phi nodes at the beginning may be missing, but
everything else is there. There are two passes. The first pass returns
a `Builder`. The second pass examines all the branches and their
corresponding destinations in order to build phi nodes at:

1. The beginning of every join point
2. The beginning of every block that follows a `let x = case ... in`

`Context` tells us which terminator to use. If we are in the RHS of
a `let` binding, then we want to branch when we are done with whatever
we are doing. If we are anywhere else, we return.

Also, it is possible that we could instead do some kind of monadic
or monoidal thing for building. I've not thought about this a lot,
but it is not necessary to inspect the `Builder` that a child
expression returns, a monadic/monoidal approach may work.
