# Linear Types and State

This is sort of a continuation of my journal entry on 2020-06-29. There are
several different cases where the need for mutation shows up:

1. Build, freeze, then use (creating a map or a hashmap from a list,
   string builders, array builders)
2. Use while building, then discard (union-find data structure, also
   maps and hashmaps)
3. Use while building, keeping alive forever (multi-gigabyte maps)

Here is a general framework for handling allocation and mutation with linear
types. Types marked with star mean that consumption is linear:

    arena : (forall s. Token s -> a) => () -> a  // Type a is nonlinear
    data Tree = Branch Tree Tree | Leaf Word
    allocateLeaf : (Token s, Word) -> Tree* s
    allocateBranch : (Token s, Tree* s, Tree* s) -> Tree* s
    freeze : Tree* s -> Tree
    myTree : Tree
    myTree = arena myTreeBuilder ()
    myTreeBuilder : forall s. Token s -> a
    myTreeBuilder t =
      let x0 = allocateLeaf (t,0)
      let x1 = allocateLeaf (t,1)
      let x2 = allocateBranch (t,x0,x1)
      in  freeze x2

This works, but marking the token with a type variable is a bummer. With the
type variable, we can track regions. That is, we can ensure that certain
kinds of discarding data can be discarded without waiting for GC (basically
by rolling back a bump allocator). Tracking distinct regions like this also
makes it possible to let the runtime know when certain mutable memory has
become mutable. This is important because it helps avoid old-gen-to-new-gen
pointers. That is, anything mutable should remain part of the youngest
generation until it is frozen.

However, this good control over memory comes with a cost. Notably, it is
confusing. Dragging around an extra type variable is annoying. In restricted
settings, we may be able to do better. Let's consider builder. Builders are
nice because they don't have pointers to any other linear values. So, we
can get away with:

    runBuilder : (Builder* -> Builder) => () -> Builder
    or
    runBuilder : (Builder* -> a) => () -> a

This works because the region is just one single mutable value. We can do
the same thing with arrays of boxed (but non-linear) values, both the growable
and the non-growable variants.

Maybe we could compromise on regions. For types without pointers to linear
values, it's easy to give them their own regions, even without the phantom
menace (hehehe). For things like trees, maybe we could just say that everything
goes into a single arena (more accurately, one per thread). Such a linear
nursery would have to be scanned just like the normal nursery, making linear
types useless for purpose (3) at the opening of this journal entry. Also,
in spite of being scanned, it would need to be treated as a GC root for
every nursery collection. Maybe I could live with the type variables for maps.
Let's go back to the map example:

    data Tree a = Branch (Tree a) (Tree a) | Leaf a
    data MTree* s a = MBranch (MTree* s a) (MTree* s a) | MLeaf* a

    insertFarLeft : forall s. Token s -> MTree* s a -> a -> MTree* a
    insertFarLeft token t a = case t of
      MLeaf {mem} b -> allocateBranch(token,allocateLeft token a,MLeaf{mem} b)
      MBranch {mem} left right -> MBranch{mem} (insertFarLeft token left a) right

There is an issue above where `insertFarLeft` is nearly tail recursive, but
linear types make tail recursion difficult in some circumstances. I'm fine with
eating that cost (or kicking the can down the optimization road). What is
really important here is that neither `Tree` nor `MTree` allows the user to
store a linear type in the tree. It should be possible to instead write:

    data Tree a = Branch (Tree a) (Tree a) | Leaf a
    data MTree s a = MBranch (MTree s a) (MTree s a) | MLeaf a
    data MTree2* s a* = MBranch2 (MTree2* s a) (MTree2* s a) | MLeaf2* a*

And `MTree2` only accepts linear values. For using something like `Int`
as the element type, `MTree` is preferable because it is more flexible. For
`Text`, I believe that only `MTree` even works at all (text cannot generally
be mutated because it is variable length). In fact, the use of `MTree2` should
be uncommon. It is only needed when the element itself needs to have mutable
pointers. But for maps, this is typically not the case.

Optimization sidenote. When the `a` type variable of `MTree` is instantiated
to a non-pointer type, the GC does not have to follow an `MTree`. It cannot
point out of the region it belongs to.

So, I think that the mutation primitives I am arriving at are:

    bytes : (ByteBuilder* -> a) => () -> a  // Byte sequences
    array : (ArrayBuilder* a -> b) => () -> b  // Arrays whose length is not known in advance
    new   : (Array* a -> b) => (Int,a) -> b // Arrays whose length is known in advance
    arena : (forall s. Token s -> a) => () -> a  // Everything else, nested linear values

In `arena`, notice that `Token` itself is a handle to a region. It
is the bump-allocated pointer. The builder types are also bump-allocated
pointers. Only in the case of `Array*` are we dealing with something that
represents the beginning of a piece of memory rather than the end of it.

What about using linearity for other stuff like file descriptors. I think
that should be fine. It should be possible to have:

    FileDescriptor : Type Int
    open : FilePath -> IO (Result PosixError FileDescriptor*)
    read : FileDescriptor* -> IO (Result PosixError (FileDescriptor*,Bytes))

Here, the resulting file descriptor does not live anywhere special. It just
needs to be consumed linearly. To be honest, I do not fully get how linear
consumption of `Int`-backed data types is really supposed to work. According
to the Linear Haskell paper, it's just "case on the data type and you've
consumed it", but this seems like it would make worker-wrapper unsound.
It might mean that somewhere, whoever is implementing the functions that
use file descriptors linearly needs to unsafely coerce the linear values
to feed them into whatever is doing the real work. If that boundary is the
FFI, this doesn't bother me too much. If it's anywhere else, this feels
a little more worrisome. If your event manager lives in library space, then
you *have* to be able to refer to file descriptors mulitple times. Maybe it's
all fine. Maybe you can just have an explicit `dupFd` and use that when
you know what you are doing.

Or maybe using linear types for file descriptors isn't actually all that
great. File descriptors sit at the boundary, the unsafe effectful part
of an application. Maybe introducing linear types there just introduces
another complication to something that is already messy and error-prone.
I don't know. I feel more excited about using linear types for performance
gains in pure code.
