# Unboxed Data Type Variants

What if, in a language that supported levity-polymorphic data types, users
were given two variants of each data type: a boxed one and a
stack-and-registers one. For example (assuming all boxed types are unlifted):

    data Maybe a = Nothing | Just a
    
    Maybe :: forall (r :: RuntimeRep). TYPE r -> TYPE 'Boxed
    Maybe# :: forall (r :: RuntimeRep). TYPE r -> TYPE ( 'Sum '[ 'Void, r ] )

    data ByteArrayPair = ByteArrayPair ByteArray# ByteArray#
    
    ByteArrayPair :: TYPE 'Boxed
    ByteArrayPair# :: TYPE ( 'Product '[ 'Boxed, 'Boxed ] )

GHC kind of gives you this, but it's presented as an under-the-hood
optimization in the form of the worker-wrapper transformation and the
`UNPACK` pragma. These two optimizations work together to avoid heap
allocations. However, GHC does not support these kinds of optimizations
on sums. More importantly, there are situations where the compiler is
not smart enough to figure out if field should be unpacked into
a data constructor. Here is an example of where context would be
important:

    parseKeyValuePairs :: Input -> List ByteArrayPair

Do we want the pairs unpacked into each `Cons` cell of the list? It depends.
If the next step is to turn the list into an array of pointers to the pairs,
probably for longer-term use, then no. In that case, it would be better to go
ahead and do the allocation for the `ByteArrayPair` since we would have to do
it later anyway, and it makes the `Cons` cells smaller. However, if the next
step is to fold over the list and print the elements, then we would certainly
prefer that the `Cons` cells have the `ByteArrayPair` unpacked.

The general idea is that the consumption of data may influence the way that
it is built. Boxing is a good option when the data might end up shared in
several places. Otherwise, unpacking the data might be better.

The important user-facing detail would be a pair of functions, `pack` and
`unpack`, that would explicitly convert from one representation to the
other. This way, if you built the data in a way that did not agree with
your consumption pattern, you would see it in your code. The way `UNPACK`
pragmas work in GHC, you never see this. Making this explicit does not
preclude transformations like worker wrapper. It just makes it easier to
be certain about what's going on when you are trying to get good guarantees
about when allocations are going to happen.
