# Compiling GRIN-like Language Case Statement to LLVM

In a pet project, I've been compiling a GRIN-like language to LLVM. In doing
this, I've learned a little more about how the compiler should be structured.
In the GRIN project itself, in `grin/src/Reducer/LLVM/Base.hs`, we see:

    data Env
      = Env
      { _envDefinitions       :: [Definition]                     -- Program state
      , _envBasicBlocks       :: Map Int BasicBlock               -- Def state ;  order -> basic block
      , _envInstructions      :: [Named Instruction]              -- Def state
      , _constantMap          :: Map Grin.Name Operand            -- Def state
      , _currentBlockName     :: AST.Name                         -- Def state
      , _envBlockInstructions :: Map AST.Name [Named Instruction] -- Def state
      , _envBlockOrder        :: Map AST.Name Int                 -- Def state
      , _envTempCounter       :: Int
      , _envTypeEnv           :: TypeEnv.TypeEnv
      , _envTagMap            :: Map Tag Constant
      , _envStringMap         :: Map Text AST.Name -- Grin String Literal -> AST.Name
      , _envStringCounter     :: Int
      }

This environment is used as the state. At first, I didn't understand why
`_envBasicBlocks` numbered the blocks. Why not keep them as a list instead?
What I realized after implemented `case` expressions is that `case` needs to
compile like this. The high-level expression

    case w of
      109 -> let t = z * z in t
      258 -> 998
      _ -> 545

Becomes this in LLVM:

    ...
      switch i32 %w, label %pattern.def [i32 109, label %pattern.109 i32 258, label %pattern.258]
    pattern.def:
      br label %return.0
    pattern.258
      br label %return.0
    pattern.109
      %t = mul   i32 %z, %z
      br label %return.0
    return.0:
      %p = phi i32 [545, %pattern.def], [%b, %pattern.109], [998, %pattern.258]
    ...

The only important difference is that we actually have to add a UUID to the
end of each pattern, so that if there is another `case` statement with one or
more of the same patterns in the same function declartion, you don't end
up with duplicate labels. Since I'm not willing to do any knot-tying, this
means that I actually need to generate the pattern blocks before I generate
the block with the `switch` instruction.

Actually, as I'm writing this, I realize that it is not really necessary to
generate the pattern blocks first. The `switch` instruction only needs to
know about the labels that *begin* the pattern blocks, not the labels that
end them. The `phi` node needs to know about the labels that end the blocks,
but since that is generated after the pattern blocks, it is not an issue.
When generating the `switch` instruction, it should be possible to go ahead
and pick out the beginning label for each pattern block, feeding those into
the functions that generate the pattern blocks.

# Managing Labels

The compiler in the GRIN project has several fields related to managing labels:

    ...
    , _currentBlockName     :: AST.Name                         -- Def state
    , _envBlockInstructions :: Map AST.Name [Named Instruction] -- Def state
    , _envBlockOrder        :: Map AST.Name Int                 -- Def state
    ...

I have seen first-hand the value in the first one, `_currentBlockName`. The
idea is that you accumulate instructions in something of type
`[Named Instruction]`, and then when you have a terminator, you consult the
`_currentBlockName`, reverse the accumulated instructions, and build a
`BasicBlock` from them. In the GRIN project, the type of `_envBlockInstructions`
suggests that it is possible to build more than one block at the same time.
I don't know why it is important to be able to do this though. I have not
needed to do this yet.

# Resetting the Label

I dislike that, when building the IR, I occassionally need to create a label
(i.e. reserve a unique identifier) and then later, I set the current block
name to the label I created. Setting the current block name does not ensure
that any instructions that had previously been accumulating get flushed.
Indeed, it cannot do this, since a terminator is not available. What I
want is some kind of guarantee that, when I begin a new block, there is
nothing queued. This might be possible with some kind of indexed state
monad. It would be nice to figure out a way to incorporate that. It
could also ensure that, after committing a block, you had to reassign
the label.
