# Interop with C Structures

What kinds of things help a programming language interop with C easily.
Interop with C is important because minimal wrappers for syscalls like
`writev` can be difficult or impossible in certain languages. What helps:

* Nonmoving GC. This means that we don't deal with pinned vs unpinned.
  GHC has copying GC and consequently `newPinnedByteArray#`, which is
  the only way to share data with C. Golang has nonmoving GC and does not
  require people calling out to C to jump through this hoop. Also, in
  Golang, it is possible to share data structures other than byte arrays.
  Note that in GHC, if you mess this up, it is hard to figure it out, since
  a programming mistake only causes crashes/corruption when collections
  happen at the right moment.
* Tagless GC implementation. By tagless, I mean that there cannot be
  a header word in heap objects. This is important because a C struct
  might have pointers to other objects, and these pointers must be
  to the beginning of other structs. To my understanding, golang
  represents heap objects this way.
* No pointer tagging tricks. Existing C code is not going to be expecting that.
* 1-to-1 threading. That is, just using native threads. Neither GHC
  nor golang offer this. Both have M-to-N green threading. This leads to
  issues like [#169](https://github.com/haskell/unix/pull/169) in the Haskell
  `unix` library. GHC provides [runInBoundThread](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/base-4.14.1.0/docs/Control-Concurrent.html#v:runInBoundThread)
  to help in situations where thread-local state is used. I suspect that
  Golang has something similar. Regardless, it's still annoying because
  you have to remember to use it. And if you forget to, your code may
  only very occassionally crash (or corrupt data). In the year 2020,
  green threads are in vogue, but I am skeptical that they make any
  performance impact (good or bad) for nearly all applications.
* Ability to match C struct layout control. Golang makes all structs
  match the C layout.
* Byte arrays as pointers. No metadata in the heap object, and no
  metadata with the pointers (i.e. no fat pointers). GHC does not
  satisfy this. It does not use fat pointers for byte arrays, but it
  does add two header words (tag indicating `ByteArray#` type and length
  in octets) to every byte arrays. I'm not totally sure about golang.
  From what I've read, it sounds like `[]byte` is actually a triple:
  a pointer, a length, and a capacity. So I do not think that a C struct
  with a `char*` field will be able to be (no-op) marshalled to a golang
  struct with `[]byte` field. I cannot find any good resources on this
  on the Internet though. I could be wrong.
