# Understanding Complete and Easy's `<:∀L` Rule

Skip to the bottom for the actual answer to this question.
[Complete and Easy Bidirectional Typecheckingfor Higher-Rank Polymorphism](https://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/~nk480/bidir.pdf)
has an algorithmic subtyping rule that looks like this:

    Γ,>α^,α^  |-  [α^/α]A <: B  -|  ∆,>α^,Θ
    ----------------------------------------  <:∀L
            Γ  |-  ∀α. A <: B  -| ∆

I'm fudging a bunch of the symbols. Notably, `>α^` is the scope marker
for `α^`, but I cannot figure out how to get a solid triangle character.
What is this rule written like this. What is it trying to prevent? The
scope marker before the introduction of `α^` makes it difficult to solve
`α^`. You can solve it with a constant (`Int` or `Unit`). And you can
use `InstLArr` to solve it. I won't write that rule out here, but as the
papers describes it, `InstLArr` *articulates* `α^`. This means that it
effectively replaces it with `α1^ -> α2^`. So, the only way the `α^`
introduced by `<:∀L` can be solved is by articulation or by setting
it to a constant. We cannot set it to another variable. Why? That's
what I wanted to explore here, because I'm not sure. Consider these
attempts to type terms:

    (\x -> \f -> f x) : (Bool -> (forall b. b -> Int) -> Int)
    (\x -> \f -> f x) : (forall a. a -> (forall b. b -> Int) -> Int)

I think that the first will be accepted and the second rejected. The
second one requires impredicative instantiation, which Complete and Easy
does not allow. So I think that the spirit behind `<:∀L` is that it
disallows impredicative instantiation. What about a situation where
`InstLArr` can be used to articulate the metavariable?

    (\f -> f True) : ((forall b. b) -> Int)

Here, `b` is instantiated to `Bool -> Int`, so this should typecheck.
This is a ridiculous example though since `forall b. b` is uninhabited.
A little better would be:

    (\f -> f not) : ((forall a. a -> Int) -> Int)

Here, we instantiate `a` to `Bool -> Bool`. The type `forall a. a -> Int`
is inhabited by functions that ignore their argument, so this could
conceivably show up in user-written code.

Actually, I've misunderstood something. The paper defines types and
monotypes as:

    Types      A,B,C ::= 1 | α | α^ | ∀α.A | A → B
    Monotypes  τ,σ   ::= 1 | α | α^ | τ → σ

So, it should be possible to instantiate to a type variable, just not
to any type containing a `forall`. I think that after `InstLArr` or
`InstRArr` solved the metavariable, the two new metavariables are
not beholden to the scope marker. The only thing I can really see
that the scope marker prevents is something like:

    undefined : forall a. a
    (\x -> undefined) : forall b. b -> b

It's hard to tell though. I might be wrong.

# The Real Solution

I think I figured it out. The scope marker does not stop a metavariable `α^`
from mentioning things from before the scope marker. It's not about that at all.
I had misinterpreted the paper. The well-formedness check for scope markers
specifies that:

    Γ ctx    >α^ not-elem-of Γ    α^ not-elem-of Γ
    ---------------------------------------------- MarkerCtx
                      Γ,>α^ ctx

The purpose of the scope marker is to make it possible for `<:∀L` to
throw away some of the output context. And then in the two articulating
instantiation rules, the new metavariables stay to the right of the scope
marker specifically so that `<:∀L` will be able to throw them away after
other rules have solved them.
