# Questions about GRIN

In the PhD thesis [Code Optimization Techniques for Lazy Functional Languages](https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/grin-compiler/grin/blob/master/papers/boquist.pdf),
Urban Boquist lays out [GRIN](https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/grin-compiler/grin/blob/master/papers/The%20GRIN%20Project.pdf),
an IR for lazy functional languages. It is
comparable to the G Machine or to STG, which is discussed in the thesis.
Some 20 years later, the trio Podlovics, Hruska, and Pénzes revisited
Boquist's work in [A modern look at GRIN](https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/Anabra/grin/blob/fd9de6d3b9c7ec5f4aa7d6be41285359a73494e3/papers/stcs-2019/article/tex/main.pdf).
The idea of performing optimizations on an untyped IR that sits below
something like GHC Core is interesting, and their [project](https://grin-compiler.github.io/)
appears to be bearing some fruit. Here are my thoughts:

* Defunctionalization seems great. GRIN requires whole-program compilation so
  that it can tag every function, but on today's machines and with today OSS
  model, maybe that isn't the impossible ask that it once was. But what about
  when you aren't building a release? What about when you just want to run
  your test suite? Perhaps it is possible to aggresively cache build artifacts.
* GRIN is definitely lower level than STG. As a result, it is able to do
  some sketchy stuff with memory. The vectorization transformation (section 4.2.4)
  and the split fetch transformation (section 4.2.7) imply that pointers,
  machine integers, and doubles are not distinguished in any way. Hruska
  has written about how this causes problems with LLVM, although I cannot
  remember exactly where. Basically, the issue is that LLVM need to know
  the types of the things it loads. LLVM does distinguish pointers from
  integers. Even worse is, what if the fields that you are dealing with are
  not uniformly sized? For example, pointer compression makes pointers 32
  bits on platforms where integers are 64 bits. What about packing 8-bit
  or 16-bit words into data constructors? These things do not appear to be
  possible in Boq GRIN. I find the [GRIN LLVM CodeGen](https://github.com/grin-compiler/grin/blob/a73a94cfaf597f3a4239f4585d270915744dc8ba/docs/GRIN-LLVM-CodeGen.md) difficult to understand. 
  Hruska talks about [RuntimeRep being STG's type system](https://www.patreon.com/posts/whole-stg-status-34711849)
  in a different post, which is an enjoyable read.
* Is pointer tagging still possible in GRIN? I think it is. If GRIN is the
  backend for a strict language, do you end up with a guarantee that pointers
  to data constructors will always be tagged appropriately. I think so, but
  I am not totally sure.
* Which of these optimizations does GRIN really shine at? For example, dead
  code elimination can be done in GHC Core. Whole program compilation is
  really what makes dead code elimination work well, but it doesn't really
  matter what IR is targeted. Defunctionalization is possible in a more
  strongly typed IR, but it would require GADTs. That seems gross.
