# IO and Regions and Phantoms

In GHC Haskell, we have:

    ST s Bool  ===  State# s         -> (# State# s        , Bool #)
    IO Bool    ===  State# RealWorld -> (# State# RealWorld, Bool #)

Let's break this down a little more. The type variable in `ST` serves
two purposes:

* Prevent the escape of mutable variables (`runST` has higher-rank type).
* Prevent nondeterministic functions like `readFile` from being used.

In a language I am imagining, allocations in `ST` are region-like.
That is, they cannot be moved until `runST` is finished. They can be
traced since they might point to immutable things though. Mutable
data will need to work the same way for `IO`. This however, is a
problem. It must be possible to, for example, allocate an array,
read a file's contents into that array, and then freeze the array.
So, we need something like `runST` that can perform nondeterministic
IO. How about this:

    data Effect  : Token -> Determinism -> Type -> Type
    writeArray   : MutableArray s a -> Int -> a -> Effect s d ()
    myArrFiller  : MutableArray s Foo -> Effect s Deterministic ()
    myFileReader : MutableArray s Foo -> Effect s Nondeterministic ()
    runIO        : (forall s. Effect s Nondeterministic a) -> Effect t Nondeterministic a
    runST        : (forall s. Effect s Deterministic a) -> a

Above, `runIO` and `runST` are similar, but they do not do quite the
same thing. What they have in common is that they provide a fresh region
for allocations. The difference between them is that `runIO` anchors
itself into a particular position.

This is pretty good. There are a few annoyances though. Consider this
example:

    foo : Effect s Nondeterministic ()
    foo = do
      dst <- newIntArray 42   -- array of integers
      runIO $ do
        writeArray dst 0 55
        ...
      ...

This is not allowed. However, it is safe. The phantom region variable
is needed to prevent pointers to mutable objects (objects that will
live in a region), but unboxed ints aren't mutable objects. If we interpret
the word "region" to mean "GC will not move this until end of `runX`"
rather than "this will be promptly deallocated", then things start
looking better for modifying parent-scope mutable data. We just need
a way to cast the parent pointer:

    runIO : (forall s. (Mutable t -> Mutable s) -> Effect s Nondeterministic a) -> Effect t Nondeterministic a

This casting function is a no-op. This seems terrible. We could instead
try using a union: 

    runIO : (forall s. Effect (s + t) Nondeterministic a) -> Effect t Nondeterministic a

This is not correct though because it would allow us to allocate more arrays
in region `t`, which we should not be able to do. Another alternative would
be subtyping:

    runIO : (forall (s | t <= s). Effect s Nondeterministic a) -> Effect t Nondeterministic a

The operator `a <= b` is read "a is a subtype of b" and means that if
we have a value of type `a` laying around, we can use it as a `b`.
This is actually a pretty nice solution. The integer array example
from earlier now works. We need to make `MutableArray` covariant in
its token and invariant in its element type. Let's consider something more
complicated:

    foo : Effect s Nondeterministic ()
    foo = do
      x0 <- allocateFoo
      x1 <- allocateFoo
      dst <- newFooArray 42 x0 -- dst has type: MutableArray t (MutableFoo t)
      runIO $ do
        -- Here, dst can be used at type: MutableArray s (MutableFoo t)
        -- Notice that the element type cannot change.
        writeArray dst 12 x1 -- allowed
        x2 <- allocateFoo
        writeArray dst 13 x2 -- not allowed
        ...
      ...

It might make more sense to have `MutableArray` be invariant in both arguments
and then have `Effect` be covariant in its token argument. This would accomplish
the same thing. I need to think about this more.

One last thing: synchronization primitives and forking threads. The type of
`forkIO` could be based on `runIO`:

    runIO  : (forall s. Effect s Nondeterministic a) -> Effect t Nondeterministic a
    forkIO : (forall s. Effect s Nondeterministic ()) -> Effect t Nondeterministic ()

How should threads talk to each other? Sharing mutable memory will not
be possible in this system since the whole purpose is to make mostly-concurrent
GC easy. Sharing immutable data that existed prior to the fork is fine
because the data will eventually age, but having threads be able to point
into each others nurseries all the time makes concurrent GC difficult.
So, the only things shared across threads should be (1) immutable data
and (2) mutex variables. (Mutex variables are like GHC's `MVar`s). Immutable
data lives in an aging, new-points-to-old heap. But where do mutexes live?
Probably in some special place in the heap. They shouldn't be tagged with
a phantom region argument like other mutable variable since the purpose is
to share them across threads. Maybe they could be reference counted. That
would make sense.

When you send immutable data over to another thread (via a mutex variable),
the data generally has to be copied. There are several exceptions to this rule:

1. The value is statically known and lives in `rodata`.
2. The "put" operation is the last thing the thread does before terminating.
   All heap blocks can be donated to the receiving thread.

Also, I think it should be fine for a mutex value to be inside of another
mutex value. If you make a cycle, this would leak memory because of
reference counting, but making a mutex cycle does not seem useful.
Actually, I'm not really sure that reference counting is possible
since it would mean that the GC would need to scan garbage objects,
and I don't want it to do that. I do not really know what to do for
garbage collecting mutex variables. It seems like they will require
a stop-the-world pass to figure out which ones are not used. I guess
there is always the possibility of pushing the burden onto the user,
but that seems horrible and error prone. Perhaps stop-the-world is
not as bad as I assume. In a multithreaded program with any amount
of shared configuration data, a big global stop-the-world GC is going
to have to happen at some point. This strategy (only collecting mutex
variables during rare global pauses) means that a program that creates
tons of short-lived mutex variables will perform poorly. I think that
is fine though. Also, the language/runtime could provide primitives
for prompt collection for common cases where short-lived mutex variables
are needed. This might even take the form of an unsafe deallocate
function. For example:

    type Command =
      { request : Request
      , response : MVar Response
      }
    foo : MVar Command -> Effect s Nondeterministic ()
    foo cmd = do
      resp <- allocateEmptyMVar
      pushMVar cmd { request = ..., response = resp }
      r <- takeMVar resp
      deallocateMVar resp
      ...

This is only sound if we know that the command runner on some other thread
doesn't duplicate the response `MVar`. I'm not even sure that this is ever
a good way to structure a program though. Actually, if you have mutable
data, this might be the only option since this proposal system does not
allow sharing mutable data across threads.
