# Writing Zero Bytes to a File Descriptor

The [POSIX specification of `write`](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/write.2.html)
clarifies what should happen if the caller attempts to write out zero bytes:

> If `count` is zero and `fd` refers to a regular file, then `write()`
> may return a failure status if one of the errors below is
> detected.  If no errors are detected, or error detection is not
> performed, 0 will be returned without causing any other effect.
> If `count` is zero and `fd` refers to a file other than a regular
> file, the results are not specified.

Unspecified behavior! I'm not sure what Linux does though. Anyway, I
thought this was interesting because it is not what I expected.

# Correctly Calling writev

I found a good [Stack Overflow answer](https://stackoverflow.com/a/5859890/1405768)
describing how to call `writev` in a loop:

    for (;;) {
      written = writev(fd, iov+cur, count-cur);
      if (written < 0) goto error;
      while (cur < count && written >= iov[cur].iov_len)
          written -= iov[cur++].iov_len;
      if (cur == count) break;
      iov[cur].iov_base = (char *)iov[cur].iov_base + written;
      iov[cur].iov_len -= written;
    }

It is nice and terse, and I like it. Even with blocking IO, short writes are
possible (although rare), so the only correct way to call `writev` is in a
loop like this.

# Atomic Pipe Writes

POSIX requires the constant `PIPE_BUF` to be at least 512. Linux has it as 4096.
It guarantees that writes not exceeding `PIPE_BUF` bytes to pipes are atomic.
Unfortunately, this guarantee only extends to pipes. Unix-domain datagram sockets
seem better if someone needs this kind of guarantee.
