# Unintrusive Representation Polymorphism

Is it possible to have runtime representation polymorphism without introducing
representation kinds into the source language? Let's start with the
representation system described at the end of the 2020-06-26 entry:

    W = 8 | 16 | 32 | 64
    F = 32 | 64
    Rep = Word W | Float F | Boxed
    Atom = Base Rep | Vec Nat Rep | Tuple (List Atom) | Sum (List Atom)

The idea is to have both `Int : Type` and `Foo : Type` in the user-facing
language, even though the two are not represented the same way. Vector types
throw a wench into this. We want to have types like:

    Vector 4 Int64
    Vector 8 PersonId
    (Vector 4 Int64, Vector 4 Text)

But we do not want types like:

    Vector 4 (Int64,Text)

Vectors are reserved for primitive types and pointers. Tuples are off limits.
But, if we erase the kind-system distinction between tuples and other types,
how can we enforce this? One option would be to split `Vector` into three
types:

    Vector : Nat -> Type -> Type
    ==>
    WordVector : W -> Nat -> Type
    FloatVector : F -> Nat -> Type
    BoxedVector : Type -> Nat -> Type // Nope!

Nevermind, that does not work. Even if `BoxedVector` could somehow be written,
we would still end up in a position where `W`, `F`, and `Nat` are kinds
distinct from `Type`. Maybe that's not so bad. But all the vectors would
only work with the built-in numeric types. You couldn't use anything like
Haskell's `newtype` with them. Going back to the more explicit system, we
would have:

    PersonId : Type (Base (Word 32))
    Vector : {r : Rep} -> (n : Nat) -> Type (Base r) -> Type (Vec n r)
    Vector 4 PersonId : Type (Vec 4 (Word 32))

It works, but `Vector` has a dependent type. Maybe this kind of restricted
dependent typing doesn't cause too many problems. I don't really know. Also,
we could get rid of the cool visibility trick on the `r` argument, which might
make it a little more simple.

What's the point of this though? Why do we need to be able to do this? What
if we had something like:

    data PersonEntity
      { id : PersonId
      , value : Person
      }
    findPerson : PersonId -> Array PersonEntity<4> -> Optional Person
    findPerson ident a = go 0 where
      ident' = broadcast 4 ident
      go !ix = if ix < a.size
        then
          let pe = a.index(ix)
          let r = pe.id == ident'
           in if any(r)
              then Some (extractfirst(r,pe.id,pe.value))
              else go (ix + 1)
        else None

That is terrible to write out, and hopefully, there is a better way to capture
the thought behind it. But, the important part in there was the vector equality
operator. Vector equality is described by:

    vecEq : forall (w : Width) (a : Type (Word w)). Vec n a -> Vec n a -> Vec n Bool

It only works on integral types, and it does not use an notion on equality that
is associated with the type. So, what's the point? We could have just written
`findPerson` to pull the 32-bit word out of the `PersonId`. Well, kind of.
We wouldn't really have a `PersonEntity<4>` type anymore. The only types that
supported vector variants would need to be products with non-wrapped field types.
This might be fine though. After all, for an ordered map type `Map k v`, if
`k` is anything that wraps a machine word, we just want a single shared
implementation (assuming everything uses the same ordering) and then perform
the no-op conversions at the boundaries. We probably need three different
`Map` types:

* Boxed keys (Guaranteed to be inefficient)
* Variable-length byte array keys (Bytes, Text)
* Fixed-length keys (W8,W16,etc.)

Only the latter two could benefit from vector registers, and it would need
to be done very explicitly. Are there other situations where we need vectors
on more than just simple types? Possibly, but in any such situation, the user
could cheat and just use the W8, W16, and friends. Coming back to the original
idea:

    Vector : Nat -> Type -> Type
    ==>
    WordVector : W -> Nat -> Type
    FloatVector : F -> Nat -> Type

Crucially, there is no `BoxedVector`, since we could not rule out nonsensical
elements. This might not be that bad. There is nothing terribly interesting
that can be done on boxed values in a vector register. That's actually not
true. In addition to projection, you could do permutations or replacements
based on the value of another (non-pointer) register. It feels like a bad
idea to just omit boxed vectors.

Alternatively, you could just have one `Vector` type and have it support
everything including tuples. Then, you would just accept expressions like:

    Vector 4 (Vector 2 W64, Vector 8 W32)

This cannot be compiled to anything efficient, and generating the code
would probably be awful.

I just don't know what to do here. I wish punting on thinking about this
was an option, but any implementation of vector registers impacts a
type system in a non-trivial way.
