# More Data in Byte Array Pointers

Rust has something it calls a "fat pointer". It's just a pointer to an array,
together with the length of the slice. On a 64-bit platform, this is 128 bits
total. It often makes sense to keep the length and the pointer together.
In a runtime with a copying garbage collector, having such an augmented pointer
would make it possible to the GC reclaim space after slices had made the
head and/or tail of a byte array (or pointer array) inaccessible. I've
discussed the on the [Haskell Libraries Mailing List](http://haskell.1045720.n5.nabble.com/GC-Managed-ByteArray-Slicing-td5882719.html)
before. A GCed language would need to do one important thing differently
from Rust. You need to know the base pointer, the offset, and the length.
Technically, you don't have to keep the base pointer around all the time.
You just need to be able to compute it during garbage collection so that
all the slices into X can figure out that they are all talking about the
same X.

I've been looking into using LLVM's safepoint support for garbage collection,
and there might be a problem here. LLVM really just wants to talk about
pointers being modified during garbage collection. But here, it isn't
just pointers. It's also the offset. The length, conveniently, cannot
be impacted by GC. So perhaps the right set of things to store is:

* Base pointer
* Offset pointer
* Length

This brings us to 192 bits. We should be able to get away with less.
It is reasonable to cap the offset and length to 32 bits. If we did
that, we could store the triple as:

* Offset (32 bits)
* Offset pointer (64 bits)
* Length (32 bits)

During GC, the base pointer can be computed by subtracting the offset
from the offset pointer. But LLVM's statepoint machinery might not
like this. It appears to only work on pointers and only pointers in
`addrspace(1)`. Conspicuously, the documentation says:

> The pass [RewriteStatepointsForGC] assumes that all `addrspace(1)`
> pointers are non-integral pointer types. Address space 1 is not
> globally reserved for this purpose.

I cannot decipher the intent here. Is it possible to use an `addrspace`
other than 1 for GC pointers? Also, could we put non-pointers in
`addrspace(1)` so that the GC could tweak those as well?

Nevermind, I figured it out. The `ni` setting in `datalayout` lets you
specify if an address space is non-integral, and a non-integral address
space is what you need for GC. And in fact, the `p` setting lets you
have those augment pointers where everything is packed into 128 bits.
And GEP works fine on GC pointers. It's mostly clicking now. I'm not
sure how GEP works on pointer that's an unusual size. Maybe there is
a way to specify that somewhere.
