# Temporarily Pinning Objects

Recently, Well-Typed put out a good blog post, which led to some
[discussion on reddit](https://www.reddit.com/r/haskell/comments/id8m9w/welltyped_understanding_memory_fragmentation/)
about difficulties with pinned byte arrays. There's also a link to
Mesh in this discussion, which is a drop-in replacement for `malloc`
that can defrag without changing the virtual addresses of objects.

What I'm left wondering is why pinnedness is a permanent property
of a byte array. GHC gives us this kind of interface:

    newByteArray : Int -> IO MutableByteArray
    newPinnedByteArray : Int -> IO MutableByteArray
    isByteArrayPinned : ByteArray -> Bool
    isMutableByteArrayPinned : MutableByteArray -> Bool

Something important is that `newByteArray` actually gives you back a
pinned byte array if you ask for something large enough (somewhere
around 3KB is the point at which byte arrays are unconditionally
pinned). Aside from that caveat, this is a consistent interface, and
it has worked reasonably well in the Haskell ecosystem for decades.
But if we were starting from the ground up, I'd like to propose a
different interface:

    newByteArray : Int -> IO MutableByteArray
    pinByteArray : ByteArray -> IO ()
    unpinByteArray : ByteArray -> IO ()
    pinMutableByteArray : MutableByteArray -> IO ()
    unpinMutableByteArray : MutableByteArray -> IO ()

That's all. The idea is the the pinnedness of an object (more precisely,
an object without any pointer fields) can be changed over its lifetime.
The only time anything ever needs to be designated as pinned is if it
is about to be passed as an argument to a blocking FFI call. Once the
call completes, the object can (and should) be unpinned. That's it.
The behavior that GHC provides (permanently pinning a byte array) can
be recovered by just calling `pinMutableByteArray` right after creating
the byte array and then never unpinning it. However, this behavior
would seldom be useful.

What about temporarily pinning objects other than byte arrays? This
would only be useful when making a blocking FFI call that accepts
a struct whose layout can be matched by a GC-managed object. So
basically, a struct with only non-pointers. I don't think this
is a common need. One UNIX function that comes to mind is `fstat`
(all the fields of `struct stat` are numbers). The scheme from
the entry on 2020-08-20 would require padding the GC-managed
data structure that corresponding to `struct stat` with an extra
word, and a bit in that word could be used to designate pinnedness.
Structs with pointer fields like `struct msghdr` and `struct iovec`
would be much more tedious. Given that these two require repeated
retries to work correctly, it would probably be better to just
write that code in C and do all those allocations on the stack.
