# A Mostly Untyped IR

One difficulty I've encountered recently is the difficulty of using
Complete and Easy to produce a typed IR. I've been thinking about
just giving up and targeting something untyped instead. Here is
an example of the language I have in mind:

    foo : Boxed -> Word
    foo x = case x of
      Nil[Word] -> 0
      Cons[Word] y ys ->
        let acc = foo ys
            result = plusSigned acc y
         in result

Clearly, `x` is supposed to be of type `List Int`, but this is no
longer available at this stage in compilation. This IR would be
similar to STG but would only support strict semantics. There would
be several phases where things would need to be eliminated or made
to appear in fewer contexts. In no particular order, this includes:

* The RHS of `let` binding must be one of these: constructor applied
  to atoms, function application. It might be prudent to allow `case`
  here, but I don't think it is actually necessary. The `case` expression
  could just be factored into own function, and then LLVM would put it
  back in place (by inlining it).
* A `case` should only scrutinize an identifier. Scrutizing a literal
  is wasteful. Scrutinizing anything else can be refactored so that
  the expression is first bound via `let` and then scrutinized.
* Tuples must be expanded everywhere so that they are never cased
  on. We want `let <x,y> = ...` instead of `let z = ... in case z of <x,y> -> ...`.
  This is easier to generate LLVM code for since means that `case`
  always examines a tag.
* Sums (unboxed) must be expanded to tuples. This probably needs to
  happen really late. For example, the type `<Boxed | Int>` would
  become `<Tag,Boxed,Int>`.
* Return values must be atoms.
* Monomorphize all polymorphic functions, making a copy for each type
  at which the function is instantiated.

One difficulty is the type of functions. In this system, functions
would have type `Boxed`. So, for example, `map` could be implemented
as:

    map : forall a. <Boxed,Boxed> -> Boxed
    map <f,xs> = case xs of
      Nil[a] -> 
      Cons[a] y ys ->
        let zs = map {a} <f,ys>
            z = f y
            r = Cons z zs
         in r

Notice that `map` takes an `a` type argument, and even though `a` does
not show up in the type of the function, it is used in the body. In
particular, it makes it possible to select the correct constructor
so that `y` ends up being an identifier for a value of type `a`.
What about `List` itself?

    data List a = Cons a Boxed | Nil

What might the expression language itself look like? In an early
stage, perhaps:

    data Atom = AtomLit Lit | AtomIdent Identifier
    data Expr
      = Literal Lit
      | ApplyKnown TypeAtom GlobalIdentifier Expr
      | ApplyUnknown Expr Expr
      | Let [Identifier] Expr Expr -- multiple identifiers for tuple deconstruction
      | Case Expr [Alternative]

Then later, we may end up with:

    data Expr
      = Literal Lit
      | ApplyKnown TypeAtom GlobalIdentifier [Atom] -- for tuple arguments
      | ApplyUnknown Identifier Expr
      | Let [Identifier] Expr Expr
      | Case Identifier [Alternative]

One thing I keep try to keep in the back of my mind is later support for
linear types. The main difficulty is the interaction with tuples. I want
to use tuples to simulate multiple function arguments, but linear types
are not really compatible with this because they would infect the type
of the tuple. Let's try:

    <Int,FileDescriptor*> : <Word,Word*>

Maybe this actually works out fine. If a tuple has a linear component,
then the tuple itself is linear. But what about polymorphism:

    <a,b> : <ra,rb>

Consider a function like this:

    twice : rep r. forall (a : r). <a -> a, a> -> a
    twice <f,a> = f (f a)

We cannot apply `twice` to a linear type because we have no idea what
the function argument does. We could capture linearity, but where?
Probably at the kind level, but prohibiting linearity polymorphism.

    Int* : Type Word One
    Int  : Type Word Many

So, trying again, in a source language, we would have:

    twice : rep r. forall (a : Type r Many). <a -> a, a> -> a
    twice <f,a> = f (f a)

But, it should also be possible to write:

    twice : rep r. forall (a : Type r One). <a -> a, a> -> a
    twice <f,a> = f (f a)

I believe this is well typed. And the argument has kind:

    <Type Boxed Many, Type r One>

Such a kind demands that the tuples is "consumed" (cased on)
exactly once since it has at least one linear component. So
maybe this ends up working out alright. What I am interested
in a variant of linear types that is much less expressive than
what is planned for Linear Haskell. For example, a linear
cons-list would not be possible. I just want the ability to
do in-place updates on data structures without the brutal
sequences requirements of `ST` or `IO`. The way this would
work would be that a user would write code that performs
in-place mutation using something like `ST` and then use
build a "trust me" (i.e unchecked by compiler) interface on top
that uses linear types.

Moving back to the lower-level IR, what exactly would linearity
mean? Let's try something:

    -- First arg is list of ints. Second arg is a linear map, int to int
    foldIntoMap : forall a. <Type Boxed Many,Type Boxed One> -> Boxed
    foldIntoMap <xs,m> = case xs of
      Nil[Word] -> m
      Cons[Word] y ys ->
        let m' = foldIntoMap ys m
            z = insert[Word][Word]<m',y,y>
         in z

There needs to be some kind of restriction that prevents the compiler 
from duplicating a linear expression. That does not seem difficult.
But CSE on linear expressions should still be allowed. For example,
if we instead only inserted even numbers with:

    -- First arg is list of ints. Second arg is a linear map, int to int
    foldIntoMap : forall a. <Type Boxed Many,Type Boxed One> -> Boxed
    foldIntoMap <xs,m> = case xs of
      Nil[Word] -> m
      Cons[Word] y ys -> case isEven y of
        True -> 
          let m' = foldIntoMap ys m
              z = insert[Word][Word]<m',y,y>
           in z
        False -> 
          let m' = foldIntoMap ys m
           in m'

I would expect that the compiler should turn this into:

    -- First arg is list of ints. Second arg is a linear map, int to int
    foldIntoMap : forall a. <Type Boxed Many,Type Boxed One> -> Boxed
    foldIntoMap <xs,m> = case xs of
      Nil[Word] -> m
      Cons[Word] y ys ->
        let m' = foldIntoMap ys m
        case isEven y of
          True -> 
            let z = insert[Word][Word]<m',y,y>
             in z
          False -> m'

Linear data constructors are trickier. I am not even sure that supporting
them is a good idea. Mutable data constructors (that support identity)
however, I like. And then the unchecked linear interface on top of these
mutable data constructors would provide something similar to linear
data constructors but not exactly the same. I wrote about linear let
on 2020-10-16. I am still a fan of the tethering hack for preventing CSE.
Also, looking back at that, I would add that the data prepared by `alloc`
should have a syntax that looks like this:

    allocator singleton : <k,v> !-> Map* k v

Using something other than the function arrow is nice because it makes
it clear that this is not a function. Then, with `let` or `alloc` or
something, these could be anchored to existing identifiers.
