# Existentials, Refinements, and Ease of Use

Let's say that a `List` (more specifically, a cons list) could be refined
by its length. The syntax might look something like this:

    sumTripletonList : List Double | len = 3 -> Double

Above, `len` is a *refinement* that tells us that the list has exactly
three elements. But in many situations, we either do not know or do not
care what the length of a list is. One such situation is left fold:

    foldl : (b -> a -> b) -> b -> List a -> b

This works on a list of any length. Even if we did know the length in
advance, it wouldn't help optimize the implementation. (If we were
doing something like building an array from a list, then having the
length would help.) If we have a refined list of type `List Foo | len = 42`,
we would like to be able to pass it to `foldl`. In a sense, `foldl`
also has these types:

    foldl : ∀ n a b. (b -> a -> b) -> b -> List a | len = n -> b
    foldl : ∀ a b. (b -> a -> b) -> b -> (∃ n. List a | len = n) -> b

Are these two the same type? More generally, how are these three
related?

    ignore : ∀ a. a -> Int   (a)
    ignore : (∀ a. a) -> Int (b)
    ignore : (∃ a. a) -> Int (c)

Certainly, `a` and `b` are different. Notably, `b` could actually
return its argument, so it has more inhabitants than `a`. But what
about `a` and `c`? Essentially, they both say "the caller passes an
argument of any type", so I believe they are the same. Should a type
system treat these two types as being equal? Is that even possible?
I don't know.
