# Stack-Based Linear Regions Without HOF

I wanted to revisit an idea from the entries on 2020-06-29 and 2020-07-01.
The idea was that local mutation be scoped with something like:

    withBuilder : (Builder* -> a) -> a

This is a first-order function, but there is another way. We could instead
track levels in the type system.

    newBuilder : Level* n -> (Builder* (Succ n), Level* (Succ n))
    freezeBuilder : (Level* (Succ n), Builder* (Succ n)) -> (Bytes,Level* n)
    snocBuilder : Builder* n -> Byte -> Builder* n

    example : Level* n -> (Bytes,Level* n)
    example n0 =
      let (b0,n1) = newBuilder n0
      let b1 = snocBuilder b0 0x0A
      let b2 = snocBuilder b1 0x0D
      in  freezeBuilder (n1,b2)

The advantage is that there is no more HOF. Compilation to machine code
is straightforward. Also notion of a `Level` subsumes the universally
quantified `s` from the previous proposal. That is, mutable structures
could only have pointers to other mutable structures at the same level.
It would appear that `freezeBuilder` could be broken up into two smaller
primitives, but it cannot. If freezing and moving up the level stack
could happen indepdendently, then it would be possible to reuse the same
region twice (regions are arranged as a stack).

One disadvantage of this approach is that it requires all mutable things
to be tagged with their level. This is no worse than the situation in
Haskell, but I was hoping to be able to avoid this. A more serious problem
is that `Level` must be explicitly threaded through every function. Well,
sort of. If a function does not use any local mutation, it does not need
to know about the region level. We need syntactic sugar around this. Without
any syntactic sugar, we need something like this:

    decodeJson : (Bytes, Level* n) -> (Result ErrorPath Value, Level* n)

But this is horrible. Plus, we know that the returned level must match
the argument level. Slightly better would be some kind of borrowing. That
way, we wouldn't have to return the level. What about hiding the level
variable with:

    decodeJson : (exists n. Level n) -> Bytes -> Result ErrorPath Value

This is nice, although we no longer have any guarantees about the linear
use of the level. Indeed, we may not use the level at all. Perhaps affine
use is what we are need? Let's use a question mark for affine use, and let's
hide the existential in a GADT.

    decodeJson : Level? -> Bytes -> Result ErrorPath Value

I don't like where this is going. With affine types, we will need to resort
to CPS, which I was specifically trying to avoid. But with linear types,
the very fact that a function might need local mutation bleeds into its
type signature. This is a serious abstraction problem. The tricks for avoiding
this all appear to resort to CPS, which levels were supposed to avoid in the
first place. What kinds of functions need local mutation:

* JSON decoders (most decoders)
* Anything that needs a builder
* Anything that builds a map from a list

That's a lot of functions. It would be better to avoid complicating their
types in this way. This approach does not seem like it works well. My
takeaway is that CPS combinators are a nice way to scope this kind of
thing because they naturally form a stack as they are nested.
