# Inequality Predicates

What if integers could be refined by inequality predicates and boolean
compositions of them. For example:

    x : Int | >=5
    y : Int | >=4
    x + y : Int | >=9

Generally, how do these predicates compose? Let's try something more
complicated:

    i : Int | >=0
    decrement : Int | p -> Int (p + -1)
    testNegOne : Int | p -> Either (Int | p && >=-1 && <=-1) (Int | p && (<=-2 || >= 0))
    index : Foo -> Int | >=0 -> Array -> Foo
    fold acc ix arr = case testNegOne (decrement ix) of
      Left _ -> acc
      Right ix' -> fold (index arr ix') ix' arr

The real magic here is in decrement. What does it mean to add two
predicates. For example, what is:

    >=(x+1), not (>=x+7)   -- between x+1 (inclusive) and x+7 (exclusive)
    +
    >=x+2, >=12

I think the answer is:

    >=(x+3), >=12

But is this right? If it is, how do you about this algorithmically? How
can we define a predicate? Let's try first without any variables:

    predicate := gte nat | not predicate | and predicate predicate

Negation and conjunction are enough to give us disjunction. It should
be possible to turn any predicate into CNF, and then maybe that would
help. I don't know.

Let's go back a little bit. There's a problem I didn't notice before.
What if a refinement refines an integer by saying that it is greater
than several unrelated numbers:

    >=x+5, >=16, >=y+2

This predicate cannot be simplified further. If we added a `>=17`, then
that would "get merged with" the `>=16`. But what about adding a term
that references both `x` and `y`:

    >=x+5, >=16, >=y+2, >=x+y

And going further:

    >=x+5, >=16, >=y+2, >=x+y, >=x+x+x+y+y

Is this predicate in some kind of "minimal" form, or can it be reduced?
If we are only dealing with natural numbers, then `>=x+x+x+y+y` implies
`>=x+y`. But if not, then this implication does not hold. So perhaps
inequalities must be grouped be both (a) the variables the appear in
them and (b) the quantity of each.

I feel like I'm not really getting anywhere with this though. Maybe,
for the time being, I should just stick to something like this instead:

    predicate := gte nat | lte nat | between nat nat

Only supporting constants. This way, there is an obvious way to support
addition of constraints.

    >=7
    +
    <=19
    ----
    >=7 && <=19

This is extremely weak since there are no variables. You cannot even
define indexing into an array. What about throwing in variables but
leaving out negation?

    val       := var | lit
    predicate := gte val | lte val | between val val

But we need to support values like `x+1`, so we actually need:

    val       := var | lit | val + val

We are in a similar conundrum that we were in before. How are predicates
grouped?

    predicate  := gte lit | lte lit | between lit lit
    predicates := finitemap<bag<var>>,predicate>

The key in the map is added to the constant in the predicate. It might
be necessary to support negation of the keys. Anyway, this style of
grouping is nice, but expression disjunction is still not possible.
The example from earlier

    testNegOne : Int | p -> Either (Int | p && >=-1 && <=-1) (Int | p && (<=-2 || >= 0))

can no longer be written. Instead, we must break things up into three
parts:

    testNegOne3 : Int | p -> Either3 (Int | p && <= -2) (Int | p && >=-1 && <=-1) (Int | p && >= 0)

This isn't too bad, I think. I would have to see how difficult this is to
use in practice.
