# Mostly Tagless GC

In the entry on 2020-08-10, I speculated that tagless GC might not
work well with Cheney's algorithm because of the need for a relocation
word. I thought about this again this evening, and I realized that
the incompatibility is not as bad as I originally thought, but it
is nuanced. Roughly, the rule is that inflation of objects of type `T`
can be avoided for non-nullary data constructors of `T` include at
least one pointer field. Data constructors that do not meet this condition
must be inflated by an 8-bit word (after padding, this can become a
32-bit or 64-bit inflation).

Here's the scheme. The first 24 bits of every pointer are reserved for
tagging the type and data constructor of every object. That leaves us
with 1TB of addressable memory for the application, which is sufficient
for any non-HPC application. Of these first 24 bits, we reserve the
high bit to indicate forwarding pointers, leaving us with 23 bits
(about 8M values) for types and data constructors. So how does this
work. Let's consider a JSON value:

    data Value
      = Object (Array Member)
      | Array (Array Object)
      | Number Scientific
      | String Text
      | True
      | False
      | Null

All of the non-nullary data constructors have pointer fields. In fact,
they all each only have one field. The representation of each of these
data constructors would simply be the field inside of them. Pointers
to `Value` objects would encode the data constructor in the upper bits
of the pointer. During garbage collection, the upper bit of the first
word (always a pointer field) of any non-tagged data constructor
would get set to 1 when the forwarding pointer was written to it.
This doesn't work for types like:

    data Foo = Bar Text | Baz Int

`Bar` can be set to a forwarding pointer easily, but `Baz` cannot since
integers are allowed to have their first bit be 1.

How often would this work? It works on cons lists (both of boxed and
unboxed elements) since the `Cons` data constructor includes a pointer
field. This brings `Cons` down from 24 bytes to 16 bytes (assuming 8-byte
addresses).  Not bad. It works on a tree with boxed elements:

    data Tree a = Branch (Array (Tree a)) | Leaf a

It works on any kind of tree where arrays are unpacked into branch nodes.
It is worth clarifying here that having a vector-of-pointer field works
just as well as a pointer field. The gains on these could potentially
be huge since omitting the tag leads to better alignment opportunities.
Consider that a B-Tree node with 8xW64 (last word is maximum) and
8xPtr (children) is exactly 128 bytes. Having to add a tag would push
this into a third cache line. I'm probably exaggerating the potential
benefit here though. Let's think about this more. With key compression,
a common case (that fits into a single cache line) would be 8xW8 and 7xPtr
(exactly 64 bytes). Since the 8xW8 actually has an 8-bit word to spare,
we could get away with adding a tag, but alignment-wise, it really
messes things up. The 8xW8 needs to be 8-byte aligned so that it can
be loaded in a single instruction.

Where does this let us down? Any situation where there is a data
constructor that we just want to put a single `Int` into. There it
does not help, although I don't believe that it makes anything worse.
