# Fixed-Width Numbers

In a business application I've worked on for a while, I have implemented
compressed arrays. They are base-offset encoded, but when the offset is
known to be bounded by 2^8, 2^16, 2^32, etc., we can store the offset
with fewer bits. This kind of compression supports random access and
makes it possible to use vector instructions when doing certain passes
over the data. It is a useful optimization in B trees as well. Of course,
you need to have a way to created specialized versions of similar code
for each width. That's what this post is about.

Most functional programming languages do not provide a good way to create
these specializations. Let's consider typeclasses and ML modules. Both of
these are equally weak in this arena. They sit on the same side of the
[expression problem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Expression_problem).
For example, if I want to say "a fixed width integral type that supports
hashing to a 32-bit word", I must create a new typeclass (or module).
As I build a function that is polymorphic in the size of one of more
numeric types, I have to introduce a new typeclass for every operation
I could perform on a number of any width. These constraints propagate
all the way up to the top. But this is nonsense. My universe is closed.
I should be able to define a function that works on every numeric type
and then be able to use it anywhere where I am polymorphic in a numeric
type. For example, with dependent types:

    data Width = 8 | 16 | 32 | 64
    equals : (w : Width) -> Integer w -> Integer w -> Bool
    equals 8 a b = eq8 a b
    equals 16 a b = eq16 a b
    equals 32 a b = eq32 a b
    equals 64 a b = eq64 a b

Even in a non-dependently-typed language, it would be possible to implement
a similar mechanism (probably subject to some kind of staging restriction).
The big question here is "Are fixed-width numbers special enough to make
this special case for?" As soon as you need to step outside the realm of
fixed-width numbers (like using text or even complex numbers), then you
would be right back to modules and/or typeclasses. Alternatively, it's
possible to allow users to create their own closed universes, but this
seems doomed to end up creating fragmentation. I'll list some operations
for which non-numeric support would be nice, and then I'll list some other
ones where it does not matter:

* A map or hash map that is polymorphic in its key
* A finger tree that tracks a measure (modules beat typeclasses here IMO)
* Reusable monadic combinators

I'll pause to emphasize that what I really want here is just the ability
to reuse data structure across different types. Often, I feel that the
presentation of various forms of abstraction is that the user would be
able to "swap out" some internal data structure for another by passing the
data structure to be used as an argument to a function. I do not care about
that feature. I just want to instantiate a data structure with different
dictionaries governing ordering, hashing, element merging, etc. That's
all the reuse I'm actually interested in. What about things specific to
numbers:

* Addition, multiplication, subtraction, bit arithmetic
* Indexing into arrays
* In certain contexts, inequality. Yes, there is an ordering on text,
  but beyond that, most types do not actually need to be ordered.
* Encode and decode for integral types. Haskell libraries often use
  `Integral` here.

More concretely, here is my proposal. From an earlier post, we had
representation polymorphism as:

    List : forall {ra}. Type ra -> Type Boxed
    map : forall {ra,rb} {a : Type ra, b : Type rb}.
      (a -> b) -> List {ra} a -> List {rb} b

But I am thinking about instead having:

    Width = 8 | 16 | 32 | 64   // Perhaps 128?
    Rep = Boxed | Float | Integer Width
    List : forall {ra : Rep}. Type ra -> Type Boxed
    increment : forall {w : Width} {a : Type (Integer w)}.
      List {ra=Integer w} a -> List {ra=Integer w} a
    sum : forall {w : Width, v : Width} {a : Type (Integer w), b : Type (Integer v)}
      List {ra=Integer w} a -> b

Basically, the kind level gets a new sort, `Width`, and then everything
seems like it will just work out. What does this give us? Notice how
powerful `sum` is here. It takes a list of *any* fixed-width integral
types and then adds the elements, possibly cutting off overflow, producing
*any* other fixed-width integral type. It might be sufficient to just
have it always return 64-bit words though. Other cool functions are:

    find : Array a -> a -> Optional Word64
    findFirstGt : Array a -> a -> Optional Word64
    unsafeFindFirstGt : Array a -> a -> Word64
    sort : Array a -> Array a
    permute : forall {w : Width, r : Rep} {a : Type (Integer w), b : Type r}.
      Array<N> a -> Array<M> b -> Array<N> b

What's cool about these is that they can be used without propogating up
a set of constraints. For example, a very general implementation of the
algorithm used to descend to the next node in a B-tree would be typed as:

    nextChildNode : forall {w : Width} {k : Type (Integer w)}.
         Array k
      -> Array Node
      -> Node

I am not totally sure that this is worth introducing in a language. It
certainly would make certain things easier, but I am not sure if these
things are common enough to warrant the inclusion of something like this
in a language. The main problem I forsee is what is the maximum width?
All applications might not need the same maximum width. Any alternative
would be to allow the construction of "type sets", but this seems kind
of tricky to implement.

A small issue is that this makes Haskell-style `newtype` over fixed-width
word types much less opaque. That is, the add function would be polymorphic
in its type (only constrained by its kind). This means that two values of
type `PersonId` could be added, which is bad. This cost might be worth
eating though.

    Word32 : Type (Integer 32)
    PersonId : Type (Integer 32)

What about the interaction with with vectorization? We would like to
be able to specify fixed-length vector types as well as machine-dependent
vector types. Let us try:

    Width = 8 | 16 | 32 | 64
    Rep = Boxed | Float | Integer Width | Vec Nat Width

This allows (perhaps even dubiously so) vectors of any width, not just
powers of two, and it only allows integral types (not floating-point
types) to live in vectors. Notwithstanding, there is appeal in its
simplicity. Perhaps floating-point numbers can be incorporated gracefully?

    WordWidth = 8 | 16 | 32 | 64
    FloatWidth = 32 | 64
    Rep = Boxed | Float FloatWidth | Integer WordWidth
        | WordVec Nat WordWidth
        | FloatVec Nat FloatWidth

This seems like it would work pretty well. It does not make it any easier to
generalize functions to work on both integral and floating-point types, but
that is not a terribly important goal. Maybe we can go one step further
and allow vectors of boxed types as well.

    WordWidth = 8 | 16 | 32 | 64
    FloatWidth = 32 | 64
    Rep = Boxed | Float FloatWidth | Integer WordWidth
    Vec = (Nat,Rep) 
    Type : Vec -> *

    Int32 : Type (1,Integer 32)
    Int32<4> : Type (4,Integer 32)
    Person : Type (1,Tuple [Boxed,Integer 32,Integer 16])
    Person<4> : Type (Tuple [Vec 4 Boxed, Vec 4 (Integer 32), Vec 4 (Integer 32)])

The above system does not actually make any sense though. Here's a better one:

    W = 8 | 16 | 32 | 64
    F = 32 | 64
    Rep = Word W | Float F | Boxed
    Vec = (Rep,Nat)
    Atom = Base Rep | Tuple (List Atom) | Sum (List Atom)
