# Extending Simple and Complete with Representation Kinds

In the algorithmic system, Dunfield and Krishnaswami have an instantiation
rule `InstLReach`:

                     empty
    ------------------------------------------ InstLReach
    Γ[α^][β^]  |-  α^ :=< β^  -|  Γ[α^][β^=α^]

Introducing kinds makes this a little bit trickier. I think that what
is needed is to add a `KindInstLReach` that looks exactly like the
original `InstLReach` but operates on kinds instead of types. And then
`InstLReach` needs to be modified:

    Γ[α^ : π][β^ : ρ]  |-  π :=< ρ  -|  ∆[α^ : π][β^ : ρ]
    ---------------------------------------------------------- InstLReach
    Γ[α^ : π][β^ : ρ]  |-  α^ :=< β^  -|  ∆[α^ : π][β^=α^ : ρ]

Notice that in the top, we switch from instantiation to subtyping. Does
this actually work though? One huge difference from the original rule is
that the output context no longer matches the general shape of the input
context. Let's try another approach. What about introducing kind synthesis?
We will use `=>!` for this operation (`>=` is type synthesis).

    Γ[α^][β^]  |-  α^ =>! π  -|  Θ       Θ  |-  β^ <=! π  -|  ∆[α^][β^]
    ------------------------------------------------------------------- InstLReach
                 Γ[α^][β^]  |-  α^ :=< β^  -|  ∆[α^][β^=α^]

We actually run into the same exact problem, a requirement on the shape
of the output context. But maybe this is not a huge problem. After all,
`<:∀L` restricts the shape of the output context in the top of the rule.
I don't really like the last version of `InstLReach` because it has an
asymmetry to it. That it, we use synthesis on `α^` but checking on `β^`.
But, this second formulation feels a little more true to the original
paper. One serious problem though is how can we figure out what the kind
of `α^` actually is when doing synthesis. There is nothing in the algorithmic
system for typing terms that lets an unannotated variable synthesize a type.
When typing terms, the original system allows terms annotated with types,
but it does not require all terms to be annotated with types. Should types
be handled in the same way or not. That is, should all types have kind
annotations?

Certainly, a type metavariable must have an explicit kind. If it did not,
then how would anything about its kind ever become known? So in the example
`InstLReach` above, the `Var` rule would then trigger to extract the kind
of `α^`. Type constants do not need to explicitly have kinds because they
would have synthesis rules similar to `1I=>`. And type constructors might
be a little trickier.

I'm becoming increasingly convinced that this second formulation of
`InstLReach` makes sense, but there is still something that bothers me.
The weird restriction on the shape of `∆`. Clearly, checking and
synthesis rules invoked should not cause the two metavariables to get
moved around or deleted, so why should this need to be explicitly stated
in the rule? There should be some kind of trick for introducing a separate
kind context. Kinds have a lot more restrictions. Essentially the kind
polymorphism in the system I envision is restricted to a prenex fragment.
Given that the contexts are ordered, where should kinds be positioned?
Are they effectively *before* everything? Maybe. Let's look at `∀App`:

    Γ,α^  |-  [α^/α]A•e ⇒⇒ C  -|  ∆
    -------------------------------  ∀App
        Γ  |-  ∀α. A•e ⇒⇒ C  -|  ∆

Now, let us consider an analogous `∀AppKind`. The only time this would be
applied is when calling a top-level function. Kind polymorphic declarations
(i.e. things that would have type `∀k...`) should not be allowed within a
function body, although functions themselves may be kind polymorphic. So,
`∀AppKind` can hit all of the kind variables at once. It does not need to
work through them one-by-one like `∀App` does, and in fact, doing so would
probably make codegen harder since we need to lower to a
runtime-rep-monomorphic IR during compilation. Here's the new rule (the star
after `π` means "one or more"):

    Γ,π^*  |-  [π^/π]* A•e ⇒⇒ C  -|  ∆
    -----------------------------------  ∀AppKind
        Γ  |-  ∀π*. A•e ⇒⇒ C  -|  ∆

Kinds do not really need the same scoping tricks that types do. They
could live in a separate context and could probably just be handled
by unification. For example, with the typing rules, we would discover
relationships like this: 

    (forall a. a) <: Unit
    (forall a. a -> Bool) <: Int -> Bool

With kinds, we want to be able to do something similar, but we do
not want to throw away the solution like `<:∀L` does since we need
those for code generation. Alright, I've got to figure out where I'm
going with this.

Let's see if we can find a better data structure for the context.  A plain list
is not great because `InstLReach` has this weird requirement that will always
be true. One possibility is to just move all the kinds to the front. If we
do this, kinds need context markers so that we end up with a variant of
`<:∀L` for kinds. And maybe that's enough.

    ΓK  |-  α^ =>! π  -|  ΘK       ΘK  |-  β^ <=! π  -|  ∆K
    --------------------------------------------------------- InstLReach
         ΓK Γ[α^][β^]  |-  α^ :=< β^  -|  ∆K Γ[α^][β^=α^]

Now, we can see clearly that kind checking and kind synthesis only modify
the kind context. There a some well-formedness rules about how kinds mentioned
by annotated types must exist in the kind context, but I think those should
be obvious.

Type abstraction and application is not supported, so kind rules for
applied types are baked into the rules for the type constructor. For example:

    WithInt : {k : Rep} -> k -> TupleRep [IntRep,k]

For instantiation, we need something like this:

    ΓK  |-  α^ =>! ρ  -|  ΘK      ΘK  |-  ρ :< TupleRep [IntRep,π]  -|  ∆K
    ------------------------------------------------------------------------ Similar to InstLSolve
         ΓK Γ,α^,Γ'  |-  α^ :=< WithInt π b  -|  ∆K Γ,α^ = WithInt π b,Γ'

In the original system, setting a metavariable equal to a constant was easy.
We just had to make sure that the constant was in the context. Now, however,
we must ensure that the kinds are compatible. Again, metavariables will always
have annotated kinds, so it should be possible to write this rule instead as

                          ΓK  |-  ρ :< TupleRep [IntRep,π]  -|  ∆K
    --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Similar to InstLSolve
     ΓK Γ,α^ : ρ,Γ'  |-  α^ :=< WithInt π b  -|  ∆K Γ,α^ = WithInt π b : TupleRep [IntRep,π],Γ'

If we introduce this requirement, we also may rewrite `InstLReach` as:

                       ΘK  |-  π :< ρ  -|  ∆K
    ---------------------------------------------------------InstLReach
    ΓK Γ[α^ : π][β^ : ρ]  |-  α^ :=< β^  -|  ∆K Γ[α^][β^=α^]

I think this system seems good. It should be able to types terms like:

    id : forall r. forall (a : r). a -> a
    Nil : forall r. forall (a : r). List {r} a
    Cons : forall r. forall (a : r). <a,List {r} a> -> List {r} a
    
    map id [4,5,6]   ==>   List {IntRep} Int
    Cons <16,Nil>    ==>   List {IntRep} Int

The fact that the contexts track assignments makes it possible to pick
out which variant of `Nil` we need since we will have saved the chosen
runtime representation. We just have to be careful in `∀AppKind` and in
the runtime-rep variant of `<:∀L` to preserve the solutions since the
original system would just throw them out. Essentially, we are mixing
representation selection into typechecking since typechecking has to
solve the representations anyway.  One last thing to consider. What about
types with lightly dependent kind signatures? From 2020-07-13, we have:

    Vector : {r : Rep} -> (n : Nat) -> Type (Base r) -> Type (Vec n r)
    Vector 16 Int64 : Type (Vec 16 Int64Rep)

I think this is fine though. Also, I need to make sure that I think though
data constructor applications a little more, but I am pretty sure that
they are not special in any way. Data constructors can be treated as
functions.
