# Difficult Things in Toy Programming Language

Here are a few things that I discovered when writing a toy programming
language. I'm writing them down so that I do not forget them next time
around.

* Lots of distinct IRs with little tweaks between each one is tedious,
  but it works well. Keeping each step in the compilation pipeline small
  (rather than attempting to fuse passes) is a good idea.
* All of the desugaring that needs to happen is manageable, but there
  are certain things that need to be done in a certain order.
* For example, renaming (includes resolving infix operators) needs to
  happen before using shunting yard to associate operators. Why? We
  cannot know the precedence before resolving the operators.
* Desugaring pattern matches needs to happen before type checking. That
  is, every pattern match needs to just be a constructor and bindings
  before an expression can be type checked. The concept of a
  "wildcard pattern" is not just surface-level syntax. It needs
  to pervade the IRs.
* Worry about modules dead last. I started thinking about this way
  too early. The most import thing to have working is the ability
  to compile a single module and having primops (like integer addition)
  available.
* Study existing compilers. There are good insights in some of
  GHC's wiki pages.
* Think about whether global identifiers and local identifiers
  should be treated differently. When working on the type checker,
  I realized that global identifiers always come equipped with type
  signatures (well, they do if it is something you want to enforce
  in the language). At what point in time should these global
  identifiers get type signatures added to them? It could happen
  earlier. It is probably worth doing a kind-checking pass first
  to check the type signatures of everything and then once we
  know everything at the top level has a well-formed type, annotate
  terms appropriately.
* Lots of different passes need to be able to conjure up new uuids.
  It is probably worth running the whole pipeline in some kind of
  uuid-state monad. Also, having to do renaming in the typechecker
  (or when inlining) is kind of annoying. I know that this can
  be addressed with debruijn indices, but it would be nice if there
  was another way. At the term level, it might be the case that
  recursive let bindings cause problems for de bruijn, but maybe
  just doing the type level with de bruijn (to handle variables
  introduced by `forall`) would be good.
