# Reference Counting Again

I'm thinking about reference counting again mostly because LLVM's support for
garbage collection schemes that require walking the stack is not great. I
skimmed a paper titled
[Compiler Optimizations for Nondeferred Reference-Counting Garbage Collection](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/221032837_Compiler_Optimizations_for_Nondeferred_Reference-Counting_Garbage_Collection).

One thing that's interesting is, with reference counting, suppose you are
in this scenario:

    foo(x)
      ... do some stuff
      y = bar(x)
      ... do more stuff
      return y

What about the reference count of `x`? It must have started out as a number
greater than zero. Do we need to increment it before passing `x` to `bar`?
We do not. In fact, we could perform any number of operations with `x` and
we do not really need to mess with the counter. Actually, that's not true.
It depends on what we know about the caller(s) of `foo`. If every caller
of `foo` always uses `x` after passing it to `foo`, then `foo` does not need
to mess with the counter. However, if any of the callers call `foo(x)` as
their final use of `x`, then `foo` needs to decrement the counter for `x`
after calling `bar`. The general idea here is that if you know your caller
is going to do more stuff with a heap object after passing it to you, then
none of your local uses of the object matter. If you are willing to accept
memory leaks, you could even loosen this so that the caller is always
responsible for the decrement.

Also, we must increment the counter when we put `x` in a heap object. This
could be deferred though. Let's say that we put `x` inside of a `Person`:

    foo(x)
      ... do some stuff
      let y = Person x name age
      ... do more stuff
      return y

Since `y` lives on the heap, the counter for `x` needs to go up. The counters
for `name` and `age` need to go up as well. Doing this all at once would
be unfortunate since `Person` might go out of scope soon. So, we could instead
start `y` out with a count of 1 and then add `y` to a list of objects whose
children need to be counted (deferral). Or, rather than adding it to a list,
we could use a bit in the heap object for `y` to indicate that its children
need to be counted.

Mutable arrays need deferral as well. Otherwise, every write is going to
cause an additional non-cache-local write.

This deferral strategy requires that objects have a count of 1 when allocated.
I think.

Deferral is also useful because it resolves a tension with sharing objects
across threads. Atomic referrence counting suffers because atomic increment
and decrement operations are expensive.

Also, I think it's probably best to not act immidiately when counts hit
zero. Doing this requires littering the generate code with if statements.
Periodically scanning the heap to reclaim free blocks seems like a better
option. I'm not sure if there is a way to be smart about this or not. By
that I mean avoiding blocks that are certainly still being used.

I'd like to pair RC with bump allocation if possible. This requires being
able to relocate objects. Because of LLVM's difficulty with GC, it would
be preferable to only relocate objects that are not referenced by the
stack. However when RC is optimized, it is difficult to figure out which
objects are referenced by the stack.


