# Presburger Arithmetic for Bounds Checking Arrays

In Liquid Haskell, we can do things like this:

    measure vlen  ::   (Vector a) -> Int 
    assume length :: x:(Vector a) -> {v:Int | v = (vlen x)}
    assume !      :: x:(Vector a) -> {v:Int | 0 <= v && v < (vlen x)} -> a 

This gives us some cool additional properties of other functions:

    findIndex :: (a -> Bool) -> x:(Vector a) -> Maybe {v:Int | 0 <= v && v < (vlen x)}
    backpermute :: x:(Vector a) -> y:(Vector {v:Int | 0 <= v && v < (vlen x)}) -> {z:(Vector a) | vlen z == vlen y}

I don't usually want something as complicated as liquid haskell though. I like
using its arithmetic for working with arrays. What is the minimum that a system
needs for me to use it for this purpose:

* Subtyping
* Refinements (not necessarily abstract refinements though)
* Existentials?

For example:

    Vector : Type -> Type
      with predicates (size: Nat)

    length      : Vector a {exists. n = size} -> (Int | value = n)
    findIndex   : (a -> Bool) -> Vector a {exists. n = size} -> Maybe (Int | value < n)
    split       : forall (n : Nat). (Vector a | size = 2n) -> ( (Vector a | size = n), (Vector a | size = n) )
    squareRoots : Vector (Int | value >= 0) {exists. n = size} -> ( Vector (Int | value >= 0) | size = n )

Which functions should be allowed to degrade? We want `length`, `findIndex`,
and `squareRoots` to be compatible with these types:

    length      : Vector a -> Int
    findIndex   : (a -> Bool) -> Vector a -> Maybe Int
    squareRoots : Vector (Int | value >= 0) -> Vector (Int | value >= 0)

But `split` cannot be used on just any old vector. The difference is that
the argument to `length` is unrefined, but it brings a refinement variable
into scope. The argument to `split`, by contrast, has a refinement. The
goal is to make this expression type check:

    foo : forall a b. Vector a -> Vector b -> Int
    foo x y = length x + length y

The necessary extensions to the subtyping relationships in Figure 3 of
Complete and Easy Bidirectional Type Checking are:

         empty
    --------------- (refined types can be used in place of unrefined types) 
     Ψ (A | P) ≤ A

And then we need another one that means that you can get rid of existentials
that you aren't using. I'm not sure how to write this rule though. This
question of existentials is tricky. We want to bring them into scope when
`length` is applied to something directly. I believe that Complete and Easy
can handle this fine since has a way of discarding unused existentials. The
weird thing about the existentials I want is that they are brought into scope
alongside arguments. That is, they are not brought in by a separate quantifier.
The algorithmic typing rule `->App` would need to introduce an existential into
the context. Is it possible to accomplish all of this without existentials?
The alternative would be for the type of `length` to be:

    length : forall n. (Vector a | size = n) -> (Int | value = n)

But this is no good. It makes it look like `length` can only be applied to
a restricted class of vectors, which is not right. If we do that, then `foo`
cannot type check. Or can it? What would happen when we checked:

    length x

We would first use rule `->E`. On the left, we would find that `e1` is `length`,
which trivially gives `forall n. (Vector a | size = n) -> (Int | value = n)`
as type `A`. Then, on the right, we end up needing to solve:

    (forall n. (Vector a | size = n) -> (Int | value = n)) • x =>> C

Then we use rule `∀App` and get:

    Γ,n^ |- (Vector a | size = n^) -> (Int | value = n^)) • x =>> C -| ∆ 

Now we can use `->App` to get:

                     Γ,n^ |- x <= (Vector a | size = n^) -| ∆
    --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Γ,n^ |- (Vector a | size = n^) -> (Int | value = n^)) • x =>> (Int | value = n^) -| ∆

Keep in mind that `x` is in the context `Γ` as `x : Vector a`. After applying
`Sub` and `Var` we end up needing to solve:

    Γ,n^ |- Vector a <: (Vector a | size = n^) -| ∆

And here we are stuck. An unrefined vector is not a subtype of a refined vector.
(The other way around would be true though.) If `foo` had instead been typed:

    foo : forall a b n m . (Vector a | size = n) -> (Vector b | size = m) -> Int

Then we could have avoided this situation, and everything would work out
fine. Why not just introduce these extra refinement variables under the hood
then? Because it only works with types in negative positions. That is, a
function like:

    dedupe : Vector Int -> Vector Int

Could not be transformed in this way. It could become:

    dedupe : forall n. (Vector Int | size = n) -> exists m. (Vector Int | size = m)

And then introduction of existential quantification into the type system is
undesirable. On StackOverflow, there is a description of a
[way to encode existential quantification with universal quantification](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/14299638/existential-vs-universally-quantified-types-in-haskell)
showing that:

    exists a. a

can be encoded as:

    forall r. (forall a. a -> r) -> r

Let's try working this out and see where it leads:

    dedupe : forall n. (Vector Int | size = n) -> (forall r. (forall m. (Vector Int | size = m) -> r) -> r)

This is unpleasant and requires CPSing the program. Surely it must be easier
to just extend Complete and Easy with existential quantification. In the
no-inference variant described in section 8 of the paper, we see a type
system where type information is all "pushed down from above". It might be
possible for such a system to allow existential quantification in let
bindings. I am not sure though. For existentials, what kinds of subtyping
do we expect:

    Int <= exists x. Int
    A <= exists x. A
    (Int -> Bool) <= (Int -> exists a. a)
    ((exists a. a) -> Bool) <= (Int -> Bool)

Subtyping with existential quantification feels like the exact opposite of
subtyping with universal quantification. This makes sense.
