# Slicing and Retention Problems

The ecosystems around Haskell, Golang, and JavaScript all encourage users to
slice into byte arrays. This makes it possible for multiple slices to share
a backing array. The cost is that a program that retains a tiny slice of a
large array leaks space. In a [chromium issue](https://bugs.chromium.org/p/v8/issues/detail?id=2869),
Adam Hooper brainstorms three possible solutions:

1. Document the leak, baking it into the language spec (golang)
2. Stop slicing
3. Distinguish between slices and unsliced arrays (rust)

A fourth possibility, mentioned elsewhere in the thread, is to teach the
garbage collector about slices. However, it seems that no one has ever been
able to build something that actually does this. In theory, it should be
possible though. See the entries from 2020-08-10 and 2020-08-18.

I wanted to expore an option for distinguishing between slices and whole
objects. First lets look at an example involving an array of structs.
This is where this works well:

    define findStrongPerson (ArrayOfStruct Person) -> OptInt
    as (people):
      loop (i starting at 0):
        if (i < people.length):
          then:
            with people[i] as person:
              if (person.strength > 80):
                then SomeInt(person.strength)
                else continue(i + 1)
          else: NoInt

This is a loop that enumerates all people, returning the strength of the
first person with strength greater than 80. The `with` construct is important.
It prevents `person` from escaping its scope. How can it prevent this?
Either with quantifiers or something else similar. Crucially, we are only
interested in the easy case where scopes nest. Any object that the
`person` can show up in gets tagged in the same way and cannot be returned
and made available outside of `with`.

If we wanted to be able to return the `Person` and have its lifetime not
coincide with that of the array, then what we really want is an array
of pointers. This design forces us to be conscious of this.

So, how does this apply to slices? If we want to slice into an array,
we must do something like this:

    with myString[start,end] as mySubString:
      x = ... mySubString ...

That's not too bad, but what if we want to take a bunch of slices? What
if we are cutting up a CSV and we want to perform as much sharing as
we can and just leave the entire file in scope the whole time? This does
not work well in that case. In fact, it seems like what we would really
want is something more like rust's lifetimes, where the lifetime of the
child is tied to the lifetime of the parent. That is, the child cannot
outlive its parent.

Still, the scoped access of the `with` combinator is a powerful way to handle
array-of-struct and interior pointers. For a nonmoving collector, such a
combinator makes it possible to just ignore interior pointers while tracing.
The `with` that scopes their use guarantees that the containing object will
stay live.

Perhaps having the garbage collector understand slices could resolve the
slicing issue. For a nonmoving collector, there are some tricks to having
this work. You get fragmented space returned to you where there are unreachable
holes in a backing array. When allocating, you need to have cheap access to
these holes. Basically, you cannot carve up memory into nice equal-size regions.
Also, for each array, you have to somehow track what is being accessed. This
means that any array pointer needs to be paired with a length, and you can't
do anything funny with the length since the GC needs to know about it. Maybe,
for every 16 bytes, you could one bit to indicate "are any of these used".
So, 1 byte of bitmask would buy you 16 * 8 = 128 elements.

The journal entry from 2020-08-18 explores making this work with a copying
collector. For a nonmoving collector, we do not have to worry about forwarding
pointers. First, let's think about the nursery tracing step. Rather than making
the meaning of the bits vary based on the size of the array, let's just make
the bitmask larger when the array is larger. A 4KB block for byte arrays would
need 32 bytes of on-off bits. When an array is allocated, all bits in the
bitmask need to be zero (they might already be zero though). After tracing
the nursery, all bits of live elements would be 1. Then all arrays in the
nursery would be broken up - finish this sentence.
