# Another way to do Contiguous

In the entry on 2021-08-29, at the end, I proposed a way to implement
`Contiguous` in a language with simple subtyping. I'd like to propose a
different way to do this: making contiguous depend on the representation
rather than on the type. For example

    IntArray : WordType -> BoxedType
    signature Contiguous
      type R : Rep
      type Array : R -> *
      index : forall (a : R). Array {n} a -> (Int | _ < n) -> a
    module IntContiguous
      type A = IntRep
      type Array = IntArray
      index = indexIntArray
    module Int16Contiguous
      type A = IntRep
      type Array = IntArray
      index = indexInt16Array

The advantage of this is that it is incredibly simple. The disadvantage is
that it is unsafe. It is possible to use `Int16Contiguous` with any integral
type. There are ways to mitigate this issue somewhat. If we have a type-directed
way to select the array modules (similar to typeclasses), that would help users
avoid most misuses of the modules. Here is `permute` again:

    permute :
         (m : Nat)
      -> (n : Nat)
      -> (r : Rep)
      -> (a : r)
      -> (i : Contiguous where type R = IntRep)
      -> (c : Contiguous where type R = r)
      -> i.Array {n} (Int | <m)
      -> c.Array {m} a
      -> c.Array {n} a

If the caller provides only the array arguments, then it should be possible
for the module arguments to be handled implicitly. If `a` is something like
`IanaProto`, then `r` will be `IntRep`. We want to use `Word8Contiguous` in
this case since `IanaProto` is a number between 0 and 255. We are in a bad
spot here because `c` doesn't mention `a`, only `r`. So it seems like we
could only solve it using `r`, which is bad. However, what we could do instead
is introduce something else that directs the solver. Something like:

    -> (i : Contiguous {Int} where type R = IntRep)
    -> (c : Contiguous {a}   where type R = r)

There must be a typing rule that confirms that `a` has rep `r` and that
`Int` has rep `IntRep`. Then we also need to be able to define these "instances"
somewhere:

    default Contiguous {IanaProto} = Word8Contiguous
    default Contiguous {Int} = IntContiguous

The type signature for `permute` can be written more succinctly as:

    permute : 
         Array {n} (Int | <m)
      -> Array {m} a
      -> Array {n} a

This is nice because now it feels much more like we are just working on
arrays, and all the module stuff is hidden. But this signature could only
use the default array types since the modules aren't bound to an identifier.
So the blessing is also a curse. I'm not sure what is best here.

But let's consider how this impacts related classes. Any signature that deals
with types that are higher-order ought to do something similar:

    signature Foldable
      type R : Rep
      type Collection : R -> *
      index : forall (a : R). (b -> a -> b) -> b -> Collection a -> b

And `Order` would not need to work that way since there are different instances
for each type, although it does need to mention the representation:

    signature Ord
      type R : Rep
      type A : R
      gt : A -> A -> Bool
      lt : A -> A -> Bool

Then, `ContiguousOrder` looks like this:

    signature ContiguousOrder
      type R : Rep
      type A : R
      type Array
      module Contiguous c type R = R, type Array = Array
      module Order o where type A = A, type R = R
      sort : Array {n} A -> Array {n} A

This is where things start to break down. Unfortunately, the implementation of
`sort` is allowed to invent elements, which means that we don't have a good
way to reuse the same implementation of `ContiguousOrder` for all of the subtypes
of integer.

So, in a way, the subtype idea was actually better. It would not have had this
problem. For example:

    signature Contiguous
      type R : Rep
      type A : R
      type Array : R -> BoxRep
      index : forall (a :< A). Array {n} a -> (Int | _ < n) -> a
    signature Order
      type R : Rep
      type A : Rep
      lt : A -> A -> Bool
    signature ContiguousOrder
      type R : Rep
      type A : R
      type Array : R -> BoxRep
      module Contiguous c type R = R, type A = A, type Array = Array
      module Order o where type A = A, type R = R
      sort : forall (a :< A). Array {n} a -> Array {n} a

That works nicely. I think that the idea from 2021-08-29 is actually better
than the representation-based approach. But let's also look at how the shared
implementations will work. We have the primitive `indexIntArray`:

    data IntArray : IntRep -> BoxRep
    indexIntArray : forall (i : IntRep) (a :< i).
      IntArray {n} a -> (Int | _ < n) -> a

I don't think that there are any difficulties with solving `a` or `i` when this
function is applied to its arguments. Now, we write the signature implementation:

    module IntRepContiguous (i : IntRep) where
      type R = IntRep
      type A = i
      type Array = IntArray
      index = indexIntArray {i = i}
    module Word8RepContiguous (i : IntRep) where
      type R = IntRep
      type A = i
      type Array = IntArray
      index = indexWord8Array {i = i}

Now we share it:

    module IanaProtoContiguous = Word8RepContiguous IanaProto
    module IntContiguous = IntRepContiguous Int
    module LittleIntContiguous = IntContiguous (Int | <10000)

All of these are valid, although the third one is pointless. Now, let's look at
`permute` again and its terse signature: 

    permute : forall (r : Rep) (a : r).
         (m : Nat)
      -> (n : Nat)
      -> (i : Contiguous where type A = Int)
      -> (c : Contiguous where type A = a)
      -> i.Array {n} (Int | <m)
      -> c.Array {m} a
      -> c.Array {n} a
    permute : 
         Array {n} (Int | <m)
      -> Array {m} a
      -> Array {n} a

Defaulting is straightforward. We just pick a default based on the `A` type
in the module. However, we are still in a bit of a bind when it comes to
letting the user override the defaults. Overriding the module chosen
for `Array a` is simple, but the one for `Int | <m` is less clear. For
example:

    permute {n=55,m=42,a=IanaProto,Contiguous{a}=IntRepContiguous IanaProto}

This would let us use a nonstandard array type for iana protocols. It would
be more difficult to make this work for the array of indices. It might be
best to just allow multiple type signatures. I know that seems weird, but
the second signature is so much more readable, and it gives you what you want
at least 90% of the time.

Alright, well, that's all I've got.
