# Sea-of-Nodes SSA and Mutable Objects

I've been thinking about whether is it possible (or even useful) to represent
a high-level language as a sea of nodes. In particular, this high-level
language would keep the heap implicit (esp. during allocation from nursery).
When lowering, we could use escape analysis to make decisions about what
could go on the stack instead. Also when lower, we would group allocations
to minimize nursery checks.

The thing that's tripping me up is local mutation. In Haskell:

    let x = runST $ do
          dst <- newArray n
          ... fill the array with stuff
          freeze dst
     in ...

If there are other `let` bindings in the same nodes, then `x` and them
are order independent. Also, the `runST` might have branching instructions
inside of it. How should that be handled? Actually, that's probably not bad.
The FIRM paper describes a "memory values" to order loads and stores. These
are like GHC's `State#` tokens. For an expression like `x`, where should
the memory value come from? Consider:

    let x = runST $ do
          dst <- newArray n
          ... fill the array with stuff
          freeze dst
        y = runST $ do
          dst <- newArray n
          ... fill the array with other stuff
          freeze dst
     in ...

We cannot feed the same memory value into `x` and `y`'s `runST`s. Or can
we? The important thing is to avoid commoning up the invocations of
`newArray`. So even though both `newArray`'s might take the same arguments
(the same memory value and the same length `n`), we could be certain that
they are different. I guess that works. We can just say "newArray is not
subject to CSE", and that should do the trick. In fact, for most operations
that operate on memory, even the possibility of CSE indicates a mistake.
If there are concurrent writes to the same place in memory, that's bad.
Concurrent freezes, also bad. Concurrent reads are fine, and it does make
sense to common them up. For example, we might have:

    ...
    a := read arr 42
    let k = munch1(a)
    b := read arr 42
    let j = munch2(b)
    pure (k+j)

We would expect an expression like this to be simplified to avoid the
redundant read:

    ...
    a := read arr 42
    let k = munch1(a)
    let j = munch2(a)
    pure (k+j)

In an IR, I would prefer that `runST` not exist. In the expressions
further up, the calculations inside `x` and `y`'s bodies should be able
to be interleaved. Threading memory values through the graph might make
this possible, but I have to think about it more.
