# Smaller Pointers

The JVM's pointer compression makes it possible to use only 32 bits for each
pointer. What about 16-bit pointers or 8-bit pointers? This gets trickier.
I've been thinking about a system for doing this. The main idea is to have
one big slab for each object type. Instead of a single base pointer, there
would be one base pointer per object type. These base pointers would all
be known at compile type. So, a `Person` might be represented by a `uint32_t`
offset, and this offset would be added to a 64-bit base every time you
needed to read a field. How does this interact with polymorphism?

    insert : forall a. IntMap a -> Int64 -> a -> IntMap a

The type `a` is not totally erased. It must show up at runtime, because if
GC happens, we need to be able to trace the stack, and we must know the
type of everything on the stack. Let's assume a shadow stack:

    typedef struct GcStackFrame_t {
      struct GcStackFrame_t* tail;
    } GcStackFrame;
    typedef struct InsertFrame_t {
      GcStackFrame header;
      uint32_t typeA; // base address for values of type a
      uint32_t map; // map with int keys and values of type a
      uint32_t e; // element of type a
    } InsertFrame;
    IntMap* insert
      ( GcStackFrame* // stack frame for GC
      , uint32_t // base address for values of type a
      , uint32_t // map with int keys and values of type a
      , int64_t // key
      , uint32_t // element offset
      )

Any time we make a function call, we must allocate an `InsertFrame` on the
stack and set the tail to the old stack frame. Functions that do not
allocate do not need any of this, the stack frame or the type witness.

How can we accomodate smaller offsets. We need a different functions and
types for each pointer size:

    insert8 : forall (a : P8). IntMap<8> a -> Int64 -> a -> IntMap<8> a
    insert16 : forall (a : P16). IntMap<16> a -> Int64 -> a -> IntMap<16> a
    insert32 : forall (a : P32). IntMap<32> a -> Int64 -> a -> IntMap<32> a

The main reason that we want this is that we want to make sure that all reads
and writes to memory use instructions of the correct bit width. Specialization
is the easiest way to guarantee that we end up with code that performs well.


