# Representations and Sharing

The whole "representation polymorphic" trick (which is really neat!) starts to
break down when you try to do interesting things with sums. Let's consider
`Option`:

    data Option a = Some a | None

How should an `Option Person` be represented? GHC adds an indirection to the
`Person`. That is, the `Some` data constructor is a heap object that contains
a pointer to the `Person`. This is a sad representation. Why? Because
traditional languages can accomplish this with `NULL`. The idea is to introduce
a special surrogate value to mean `None` and then have anything else just be
the represented as the pointer in the `Some`. We can make this more powerful
by using a full 8-bit word to distinguish alternatives. As far as what's inside,
we have several possibilities:

* A pointer
* A word (i.e. a number)
* Nothing at all (e.g. `None`)

Depending on what is on the inside, we have different options available to us.
Pointers only really need 48 bits. Let's say that we always use 8 bits for the
tag. So, `Option Person` could be handled with 56 bits (still less than the 64 bits
in a machine word) and `Option (Option Person)` could be handled with 64 bits.
This is neat. Generally, most sums could actually be handled like this. If sums
were restricted to only being able to contain a single field, then the
representation would become the pointer for the inner field with a tag in
the upper bits.

Numbers throw a wrench into this system. Numbers require the full 64 bits,
so any tag would pushes you out of the single-machine-word representation.
Consider a type like this:

    data Result
      = Success Person
      | Failure (Word | <2^48)

We could represent this as a word where the low 48 bits are either a pointer
to a `Person` or a word and some of the upper 16 bits are a tag that tells
you which case you are in. The generalizes nicely to larger numbers of
data constructor (basically not more than 127 pointer ones or word ones).
Above, neither of the data constructors allocate any memory. They just
manipulate a machine word, producing a new one with tag bits.

# Blocking Subtyping with Data Types

Basically, what's going on is that we need to use data type declarations
to prevent subtyping in certain situations. This happens with arrays too.
Consider this array type:

    Array (Word | <2^16)

It's tempting to think: we can represent every element with 2 bytes. But
since the array can be upcast to `Array (Word | <2^32)`, we cannot actually
do this. There are two options for working around this. One is to prevent
subtyping from passing through type-constructor applications. That seems
horrible. The other option is to introduce types like `Word16`:

    data Word16
    makeWord16 :: (Word | <2^16) -> Word16
    word16ToWord :: Word16 -> (Word | <2^16)

Now, the earlier array could be given type:

    Array Word16

And we don't have to worry about the upcast. To make `Word16` as flexible
as `Word`, we would need to make it possible to parameterize it by a refinement:

    data Word16 r
    makeWord16 :: forall (r :< (<2^16)). (Word | r) -> Word16 r
    word16ToWord :: Word16 r -> (Word | r)

Now, we allow things like `Word16 | <100` and enforce this at the construction
site. But this requires abstracting over refinements. This could cause problems
with type inferrence, but I'm not totally sure. I think it would only cause
problems if there were multiple abstract refinements related by subtyping. Even
then, it doesn't seem like that would actually lead to a bad issue, as long as
everything showed up on the arguments.

Also, notice in the above formulation that it's possible to upcast `Word16`
to have a predicate that includes out-of-range elements. This is fine.

# Arrays, Modules, and Code Sharing

Arrays could be handled by a SML-style system, but the annoying this about this
is that everything should really just be available to be stored in an array.
Moreover, the array should use the optimal representation for each type, and
there is only one good representation for each type. There just isn't more
than one good way to have a random-access array of 32-bit numbers.

If all types can implicitly be stored in arrays, what this means for the
purposes of code generation is that every function needs to track (not in
its user-facing type), for each type variable, if the value is ever
possibly stored in an array. If it is, then we end up creating more
specializations since `Word16` and `Word32` are treated differently.
However, a function that doesn't store its polymorphic value in an
array would use the same implementation for `Word16` and `Word32`.

Or would it? For a type like `Option`, we can actually store our
data more compactly if we are dealing with `Word32` instead of
`Word64`. So, what we might want to do is track all type constructors
that end up being applied to an argument over the course of the
function's body and then look at which type constructors require
different implementations for different types. For example, `Option`
applied to `Word16` and `Word32` should result in the same code,
but `Option` applied to `Word64` does not. However, `Array` results
in different code for all of those types.

# Problem with Arrays of Indices

Look at the example type signatures for permutation in the entry
from 2021-08-27. One problem with the above formulation of `Word16`
is that there is no way to write the very general `permute` anymore.
An alternative is to parameterize `Word` itself by an additional
refinement, one that is not subject to subtyping. This makes it
possible to pick different implementations based on this refinement
since it cannot change under our noses via an upcast.

    data Word s r | r :< s
    cast : forall (r :< s). Word r -> Word s r
    zero : Word (=0)   // create zero of any bit width, all same implementation
    index : Array {n} a -> Word {p} (<n) -> a  // all same impl, may omit p
    sum : Array {n} (Word {p} r) -> Word   // different impl for each p, result must be unbounded
    permute :   // different impl for each p
         (m : Nat)
      -> (n : Nat)
      -> Array {n} (Word {p} (<m)) // Could omit this p since we do not care about it
      -> Array {m} a
      -> Array {n} a
    mapSucc : forall ((<m+1) :< q).
         Array {n} (Word {p} (<m))
      -> Array {n} (Word {q} (<m+1))
    mapSuccTruncate : // rolls back to zero on overflow
         Array {n} (Word {p} (<m))
      -> Array {n} (Word {p} (<m+1))
    mapSuccCrash :
         Array {n} (Word {p} (<m))
      -> Array {n} (Word {p} (<m+1))

This seems like it should be alright. The general idea is that we can
usually ignore the predicate that restricts the width. It only really
starts to matter in arrays, and even then, it only encumbers us when
we are creating an array. This is because we then have to prove that
our new bound is alright.

Realistically, anything that is trying to create an array of sub-word-sized
elements as the result of arithmetic is probably going to need to perform
a size check and possibly crash. It's just typically hard to prove that
the result of adding a bunch of numbers is going to be less than something.
However, when simply consuming a packed array, we are in a better position.
Here, only codegen need care.

For words that assume the full 64-bit domain, we can just assume that overflow
does not happen. These overflows are uncommon.

I'm still not fully satisfied with this approach. It's a little ugly to
have to punish `Word` in all contexts even with it's only underneath
type constructors that this matters. Heck, it's really just when it's
an array element that this truly matter since we could just give up on
all the other cases. But, it's hard to push this into `Array` if we want
the same `Array` type to work on boxed elements as well. Even more problematic
is that if we push this into `Array`, then we don't really have just one array
type anymore. Tacking this information onto `Word` is a neat trick, but it
infests the `Word` type with needless information.

# A Different Hack

I have one other idea for how to accomplish this. Make `Array` polymorphic
in its element, but when the element type is `Word`, `Array` takes an
additional parameter that is the size of each element. Nothing is done
to enforce bounds, and the user is responsible for passing only
appropriately constrained `Word` subtypes. For example:

    Array Person     // array of pointers
    Array Thing      // array of pointers
    Array IanaProto  // array of 8-bit words
    Array Country    // array of 16-bit words
    Array (Word | <10000) // array of 8-byte words, unspecified size defaults to 8-byte elements
    Array {size=2} (Word | <10000) // array of 2-byte words
    Array {size=n} (Word | <m) // array of n-byte words, where n must be 1, 2, 4, 8. Caller
                               // must enforce relationship between n and m.

Although the same thing could be done, in theory, for every type constructor,
I doubt that there is any value in such a scheme.

This solution is strange because it violates something that we expect to
be true of type constructors. It means that the form of a type application
changes depending on what the element is. Oh, now I'm beginning to see
the real problem though. If you implement a B Tree on top of these arrays,
you end up needing to bubble `size` up to your B Tree type. So then there
would be other type constructors that ended up having to care about this.

# Back to the Original Scheme

Let's go back to the very first scheme from the entry on 2021-08-27. There,
we had this:

    signature Contiguous
      type A
      type Array {Nat}
      index : Array {n} -> (Int | _ < n) -> A
    permute :
         (m : Nat)
      -> (n : Nat)
      -> (i : Contiguous where type i.A = (Int | <m))
      -> (c : Contiguous)
      -> i.Array {n}
      -> c.Array {m}
      -> c.Array {n}

The problem was that we could not instantiate `permute` with `i = Word16Contiguous`.
First thought is, drop the idea of `Word16Contiguous` constraining its element
and just require the user to enforce this. Second thought is that even without
this constraint, we are still in trouble. Why? Because all of the integral
`Contiguous` implementations are going to say that `i.A = Int`, which does not
match.

Now, here's the real question. Does this subsumption hold:

    (i : Contiguous where type i.A = Int)
    :<
    (i : Contiguous where type i.A = (Int | r))

Clearly, this depends on the nature of the signature. If there may exist
implementations that simply conjure up values of type `A`, then no, this
subsumption is garbage. Unfortunately, it is possible to implement `Contiguous`
in this bad way. I wonder if we could do something with signatures where
the signature could say of a type: the implementer must not create values
of this type. This is trivially true if the type is polymorphic, but within
an implementation, it is monomorphic.

One possibility is to parameterize `Contiguous` by the refinement. An
abstract refinement is enough to guarantee parametricity.

    signature Contiguous {r}
      type A
      type Array {Nat}
      index : Array {n} | r -> (Int | _ < n) -> A | r

This is unpleasant to use though. How about something else? What if we
just declare that `Contiguous` must be parametric in `A` and then wire
in all the implementations of it. There are other signatures that have
this same property: `Eq`, `Ord`, `Foldable`. For `Eq` and `Ord`, it is
trivially the case that an implementation cannot create an element.
This is because the element type only appears in negative positions.
However, for `Foldable`, it depends on the definition. The essential
`foldl` and `foldr` functions keep the element in negative positions,
but other functions like `minimum` have the element in a positive
position.

I think that maybe the idea of parameterizing the signature by the refinement
was the right idea. Let's say that it's optional all defaults to Top if
unspecified. Then permute would become:

    permute :
         (m : Nat)
      -> (n : Nat)
      -> (i : Contiguous (<m) where type i.A = Int)
      -> (c : Contiguous)
      -> i.Array {n}
      -> c.Array {m}
      -> c.Array {n}

Now we can instantiate `permute` with `i = Word16Contiguous (<m)`. Now foldable
is easy as well:

    signature Foldable {r}
      type A
      type Collection
      fold : (b -> A | r -> b) -> Collection | r -> b -> b
      minimum : Collection | r -> A | r

This approach is unsatisfying though. There is something that we should have
been able to tell without littering an abstract refinement everywhere, but
we've lost it. The thing we want to be able to say is: implementations of
this refinement cannot create values out of thin air. And the right way to
communicate this is with normal type variables. Why not put the type in
the signature:

    signature Contiguous a
      type Array {Nat}
      index : Array {n} -> (Int | _ < n) -> a
    signature Foldable a
      type Collection
      fold : (b -> a -> b) -> Collection -> b -> b
      minimum : Collection -> a
    permute :
         (m : Nat)
      -> (n : Nat)
      -> (i : Contiguous (Int | <m))
      -> (c : Contiguous a)
      -> i.Array {n}
      -> c.Array {m}
      -> c.Array {n}

Without doubt, the implementations of `Contiguous` all still need to be
built-ins. Foldable, however, would not need this. Certain implementations
of `Foldable` may require `Contiguous` (if the data structure contains arrays),
but then the the call from `minimum` to `Contiguous`'s array-minimum function
would stay parametric.

A foldable implementation might look like this:

    module function MapFoldable{a} (Contiguous a) : Foldable a
      -- The same type a is in scope everywhere inside here. IntMap,
      -- which uses an array of <a> at the leaves, needs a Contiguous
      -- module for its elements.
      type Collection = IntMap a
      fold : forall b. (b -> a -> b) -> IntMap a -> b -> b
      minimum : IntMap a -> a

So, any signature for a higher-kinded type could pull the element up to the
`signature` line if it wanted to communicate polymorphism in the element.
However, the implementations can pick a concrete `a` if they need to.
Consider an efficient set of integers:

    module function IntSetFoldable{a=Int} (Contiguous a) : Foldable a
      type Collection = IntSet
      fold : forall b. (b -> a -> b) -> IntSet -> b -> b
      minimum : IntSet -> a

That doesn't work actually because it's not possible to make `minimum`
type check. Maybe. We almost certainly want for `IntSet` to be able to
carry a refinement. We could do this by giving it a constrained type
variable argument or by just parameterizing by the refinement. I prefer
the former. Let's try this again:

    signature Bits a    // a finite number of bits
      size : Int
      testAt : a -> Int -> Bool
    data IntSet<b : Bits a>
    insertIntSet : (b : Bits a) => a -> IntSet<b> -> IntSet<b>
    foldIntSet : (b : Bits a) => (c -> a -> c) -> c -> IntSet<b> -> c
    module function IntSetFoldable{a} (b: Bits a) : Foldable a
      type Collection = IntSet<b>
      fold : forall c. (c -> a -> c) -> IntSet<b> -> c -> c
      minimum : IntSet<b> -> a

This is neat, and it seems like this would work pretty well. I think
that `Bits` is wrong though because we cannot actually have `a` be
free in any implementation. Let's try it as this instead:

    signature Bits    // a finite number of bits
      type [negative] A
      size : Int
      testAt : A -> Int -> Bool
    data IntSet<b : Bits>
    insertIntSet : (b : Bits) => b.A -> IntSet<b> -> IntSet<b>
    foldIntSet : (b : Bits) => (c -> b.A -> c) -> c -> IntSet<b> -> c
    module function IntSetFoldable{a} (b: Bits where b.A = a) : Foldable a
      type Collection = IntSet<b>
      fold : forall c. (c -> a -> c) -> IntSet<b> -> c -> c
      minimum : IntSet<b> -> a

Crucially, we are only allowed to set `b.A = a` in the instance because
`Bits` only uses `A` in negative positions. This means that our implementation
of `Foldable` cannot possibly pull an `a` from thin air. Any `a` value must
come from an argument to a function. What this means is that, if we need
to be able to fold over a collection of bounded numbers, we can use
subtyping:

    lookupAndEncode :
         (f : Foldable (Int | < 100))
      -> f.Collection
      -> Array {100} Text
      -> Text

We may safely take any module implementing signature `Foldable Int` and use
it as the `Foldable (Int | <100)` that the function wants. I think it is not
even necessary to have this special parameter appear on the signature line.
It should be possible to just mark it with a keyword:

    signature Bits
      type [negative] A
      size : Int
      testAt : A -> Int -> Bool
    signature Foldable
      type [free] A
      type Collection
      fold : (b -> A -> b) -> Collection -> b -> b
      minimum : Collection -> A
    signature Contiguous
      module Foldable f
      index : Collection {n} -> (Int | _ < n) -> f.A
    module function IntSetFoldable (b: Bits) : Foldable
      type [free] A = b.A
      type Collection = IntSet<b>
      fold : forall c. (c -> a -> c) -> IntSet<b> -> c -> c
      minimum : IntSet<b> -> A

The meaning of `type [free]` is that, in an implementation, the type may only
be assigned to a `negative` type from another signature. Alternatively, it can
be assigned to a truly free type variable passed in to the module. This second
case is only needed for unconstrained data. For example, a boxed array is
`Foldable`:

    module function BoxedArrayFoldable (a : Type) : Foldable
      type [free] A = a
      type Collection = BoxedArray a
      fold : forall c. (c -> a -> c) -> BoxedArray a -> c -> c

The signatures `Bits`, `Eq` and `Ord` all have `negative` elements. Just like
with `free` elements, this ends up meaning that we can turn an
`Ord a where a = Int` into `Ord a where a = Int | r` for any `r`:

    IntOrder : Order where type A = Int
    sort :
         (o : Order)
      -> (c : Contiguous where c.A = ord.A)
      -> c.Collection
      -> c.Collection
    sort = ...
    sortSmall : Int8Array (Int | <n) -> Int8Array (Int | <n)
    sortSmall = sort
      { o = IntOrder       where type A = (Int | <n)
      , c = Int8Contiguous where type A = (Int | <n)
      }

Could `sortSmall` have inferred both of these parameters? Could it have
inferred the subtyping on their elements?

# The Best Way

I found a more principled way to do this. It requires allow a subtype
quantifier:

    signature Bits
      type [free] A
      size : Int
      testAt : A -> Int -> Bool
    signature Foldable
      type [free] A
      type Collection a // Type a must be a subtype of A but I do not
                        // know if this should be enforced here.
      fold : forall (a :< A). (b -> a -> b) -> Collection a -> b -> b
      minimum : Collection -> A
    signature Contiguous
      module Foldable f
      index : forall (a :< A). Collection {n} a -> (Int | _ < n) -> a

In `Bits`, we can see that `testAt` doesn't need to use a subtype. This
is because the types

    testAt : A -> Int -> Bool
    AND
    testAt : forall (a :< A). a -> Int -> Bool

Are the same type. Similarly, we could actually do `fold` either way,
and it's probably better to omit the quantified `a` variable. But
the use of a quantified `a` in `index` constrains the implementation
by making it impossible for an implementer to pull an `A` from thin
air. Now:

    permute :
         (m : Nat)
      -> (n : Nat)
      -> (i : Contiguous where type A = (Int | <m))
      -> (c : Contiguous)
      -> (a :< c.A)
      -> i.Array {n} (Int | <m)
      -> c.Array {m} a
      -> c.Array {n} a

The extra `a` that has to come into scope is kind of annoying. But it
must be kept around if we want to be able to communicate that `permute`
does not create values. Does it though? I'm not sure. Since `c` is free,
I think we could do this instead:

    permute : forall a.
         (m : Nat)
      -> (n : Nat)
      -> (i : Contiguous where type A = (Int | <m))
      -> (c : Contiguous where type A = a)
      -> i.Array {n} (Int | <m)
      -> c.Array {m} a
      -> c.Array {n} a

Now, if we want a constrained type for `a`, we can just use polymorphism
the normal way. Hmmm... this is strange that this works so well. What
if we went back to an earlier approach, but instead of `Contiguous` accepting
the direct argument, its just the implementations:

    signature Contiguous
      type A
      type Array : * -> *
      index : Collection {n} A -> (Int | _ < n) -> A
    module IntContiguous r
      type A = Int | r
      type Array = IntArray
      index : IntArray {n} A -> (Int | _ < n) -> A

Now, we cannot take just any old `Contiguous` and use element subtyping,
but when we go to use `IntContiguous`, we can pick a subtype. That is,
the "free theorum" thing is a property of the implementation modules, not
of the signatures. So, we have the same thing as before, but the elements
have disappeared.

    permute : forall a.
         (m : Nat)
      -> (n : Nat)
      -> (i : Contiguous where type A = (Int | <m))
      -> (c : Contiguous where type A = a)
      -> i.Array {n} (Int | <m)
      -> c.Array {m} a
      -> c.Array {n} a

Let's look at how other examples play out.

    signature Order
      type A
      lt : A -> A -> Bool
      gt : A -> A -> Bool
    signature ContiguousOrder
      type A
      type Array
      module Contiguous c type A = A, type Array = Array
      module Order o where type A = A
      sort : Array {n} -> Array {n}
    module IntContiguousOrder r
      type A = Int | r
      type Array = IntArray
      module Contiguous c = ...
      module Order o = ...
      sort : Array {n} (Int | r) -> Array {n} (Int | r)

An alternative to putting the refinement on the module line would be to include
it in the signature functions themselves:

    signature Contiguous
      type A
      type Array : * -> *
      index : forall r. Collection {n} (A | r) -> (Int | _ < n) -> (A | r)
    module IntContiguous
      type A = Int
      type Array = IntArray
      index : forall r. IntArray {n} (Int | r) -> (Int | _ < n) -> (Int | r)

I think this is an even stronger option. One last concern I have with all
the array stuff is what about int-like enum types that should be stored
with a single byte. They would use something like `Word8Contiguous`, but
how would the underlying `Word8Array` actually work? It can be parameterized
over anything, which is both good and not good. It's not good because we
could stick a boxed type in there, and the type system would not stop us.
It's good because there are types backed by words that we want to put in there.
One might be tempted to say: just perform the no-op conversions before putting
elements in and before taking them out. But there's a problem. This means
that all of the `Contiguous` implementations are actually different from
one another, and we end up needlessly duplicating lots of code in the final
binary. We could introduce a magic trick like GHC's coerce. If we added
runtime representation though, we could do this:

    IntArray : WordType -> BoxedType
    module IntContiguous (i : WordType)
      type A = i
      type Array = IntArray
      index : forall r. IntArray {n} (i | r) -> (Int | _ < n) -> (i | r)

And now the sharing is all straightforward. When being lowered to a more
weakly typed IR, `IntContiguous Int` and `IntContiguous IanaProto` would
both just become `IntContiguous` as types melted away, and I think the
whole module would become:

    module IntContiguous
      type A = WordType
      type Array = BoxedType
      index : BoxedType -> WordType -> WordType

This seems like a good way forward because it also lets us do something
powerful with boxed arrays:

    module BoxedContiguous (i : BoxedType)
      type A = i
      type Array = BoxedArray
      index = ...

And now the sharing there is obvious as well.

The only weird thing about the implementation above is that we have to
be able to talk about refinements whose types are unknown. It probably
makes more sense to do this:

    indexIntArray : forall (i : WordType) (r : Refinement i).
      IntArray {n} (i | r) -> (Int | _ < n) -> (i | r)

Now it's clear where `r` can and cannot appear. Also, if we do the
representation thing, we don't need a `Bits` signature, which is nice.
Well, we could have one, but there would only be one implementation of
it. Maybe not. We might need other implementations for `Word128` and
`Word256`. I'm still not totally sure what to do about these two types.
They probably need their own representations.
