# Tuples Without Casing

There are two different ways to add tuples to System F. Tuples can be
destructured by casing or by projection function (`fst` and `snd`).
This difference is evident when using the result of a function:

    -- Casing
    let t = f x
     in case t of
          (a,b) -> ... a ... b ...
    -- Projection
    let t = f x
     in ... t.0 ... t.1 ...

When implemented with projection, it is possible to add tuples without
adding full algebraic data types. Also, the IRs implied by projection
are simpler to read and result in less nesting. Projection also make certain
parts of codegen easier. When lowering from ANF to C or LLVM, if you
implement tuples with casing, you have to remove all of the "fake" case
expressions used to scrutinize tuples.

Any single-data-constructor data type could be handled with projection,
although it is important to distinguish between stack-allocated data
(unboxed products) and heap-allocated data (boxed products). Consider:

    data Foo = Foo { age : Int, health : Int, poisoned : Bool, name : Text}
    ...
    let t = f x
     in ... t.age ... t.name ...

If `Foo` is boxed, then `t` is implemented as a base pointer. Accesses to
fields are simply loads at offsets. If `Foo` is unboxed, there is no
guarantee about the way that it's fields exist at runtime. They might
be in any order, some on the stack and some in registers. Fortunately,
the backends I'm aware of (C and LLVM) make it possible for the user
to pass around stack-allocated products rather than having to manually
decompose them into fields and pass around the fields.

# Sums

Sums require case statements. However, there is a difference between how
boxed sums and unboxed sums are lowered. Consider:

    data Result = Error Text | Result Int
    let r = f x
     in case r of
          Error e -> 
          Ok a ->

If `r` is boxed, then everything stays just like this all the way through
code gen. However, if it is unboxed, then we must at some point turn the
unboxed tuple into a product:

    data Result = Result { tag : Int, error : Text, ok : Int }
    let r = f x
     in case r.tag of
          0 -> ... r.error ...
          1 -> ... r.ok ...

So, we end up with case-on-int.
