# A Low-Level CFG Language

Researcher and compiler authors have developed several low-level CFG languages
to help accomplish various goals:

* LLVM
* FIRM
* Cranelift
* Cmm
* (Whatever Golang uses internally)

These all serve slightly different purposes. Something that turns out to be
pretty important for a garbage collected language is for the low-level CFG
language to understand GC-managed pointers. There isn't a whole lot of room
for powerful optimizations once you get down to this level. It's mostly
just picking up the crumbs left on the table by lowering from the higher-level
language. For example, you can get some opportunities for constant folding
when labels are resolved to offsets. You can turn division by a constant
into instructions that are cheaper for most processors.

FIRM is very explicit about the loose order of everything. This is neat.
However, FIRM is a backend for C and C-like languages. The only things
I don't like about it from reading the paper are:

1. It uses a weird hack to make sure that it doesn't erase infinite
   loops. I'm not sure that this is avoidable though.
2. It uses phi instructions. These are probably not avoidable because
   of how FIRM tries to keep control flow inverted.

What about adding support for GC-managed pointers? That doesn't seem
difficult. You just keep track of what kind of data something is. That's
fine because it's already necessary to distinguish floating-point values
from integers. So, you just have to add a "managed pointer" type. This is
one of Cmm's types.

FIRM has a special "store" value used to loosely order memory accesses.
Split and join nodes make indeterminate orders possible. It should be
possible to put these to good use for data initialization.
