# Reference Counting for Hypothetical Language

Reference counting GC can be accelerated by several tricks. Broadly, these
tricks focus on deferring counter updates. My suspicion is that in most
mutable-to-mutable relationships, the referent object has a single referrer
at any given point in time. Otherwise, aliasing madness ensues. For these
situations, a more manual allocate-free strategy (possibly assisted by
some kind of linearity checker) should be sufficient. Really, any mutable
referent should be unique, so this leaves two situations that concern me:

* Immutable to immutable: Easy because there are no updates. On allocation
  counters are either incremented, or increments are buffered, or nothing
  at all happens (nursery with copying collector)
* Mutable to immutable: Tricky because there are updates. What is unacceptable
  is adjusting the counter on every mutation.

It is this second case that I'd like to consider more. The best option that
I am aware of is something like a remembered set but that also stores all
original pointers in the object. On any mutation, a branch is taken. If
the same objects are repeatedly mutation, this branch should be easy to
predict. Later (during a stop-the-world collection), the current set of
pointers in the objects is compared with the active set, and counters are
adjusted.

There is another option, but I cannot find a way to make it fast. All mutable
pointers to immutable objects would need to take up twice as much space at
runtime. This may seem bad, but consider that most data on the heap should
not be pointers. During a stop-the-world collection, all of these duplicate
pointers would be made equal to their active values. Each mutation would
cause the object to somehow indicate that it was dirty. No branching! But,
how can we indicate that the object is dirty? The most simple option
would be to mark a bitmap. This bitmap would need to be scanned during
stop-the-world collection. Consider a 64GB heap with 1B objects. Of these,
no more than half would be mutable objects with pointers to immutable. The
true number must be must lower. The mutable objects with pointers to immutable
objects would likely be arrays with 8 objects each. So let's say that we
have 50M mutable objects with pointers to immutable objects. Rounding to
64M objects, we estimate that the bitmap takes 8MB storage. Not bad, but
we have to scan it during every minor collection. This would certainly blow
out the cache. No good. Plus, even if accessing it were faster, the
instructions to update it would be:

    BYTEPOS <- CALCULATE BYTE ADDR
    BITPOS <- CALCULATE BIT ADDR
    BYTE <- READ BITMAP
    WRITE BITMAP (BYTE AND BITPOS)

The remembered set is certainly going to do better. Plus, the machinery needed
to update the remembered set offers us an opportunity to perform a collection
more promptly if the set starts to grow too large. If the remembered set
exceeds a few thousand objects, then we probably want to go ahead and perform
a minor collection so that increments and decrements can be applied to things
that are still hot in the cache. With the bitmap, we would not have the
opportunity to do this.

I'm leaning toward complementing this with Ueno's nonmoving collector for the
nursery. If you use a copying GC for the nursery, then the possibility of
running minor GC during an update of the remembered set would mean that it
would be necessary to reload pointers after any mutation of immutable fields.
Actually, maybe reloading here would not be that bad. I'm not sure.

# Opting out of correctness for high performance 

I wonder whether or not it is possible to handle certain mutable data
structures in such a way that the internal mutable objects are not reference
counted. That is, the root node would be reference counted, but everything
else would not be. This way, users of the mutable data structures would
not need to call free. I am not sure if this is a good idea though. Aliasing
the root would still cause correctness problems. So maybe it is just better
to try to invest in linear infrastructure for this problem.


