# Precise GC, Interior Pointers, and a Bump-Allocated Nursery

I've been thinking for some time about how this could be accomplished. I want
to support interior pointers for two reasons:

1. Unpacking small arrays unpacked into data constructors
2. Slicing into byte sequencing

Interior pointers and a bump-allocated nursery are at odds. Interior pointers
demand that the runtime be able to locate the beginning of an object given
any pointer to the inside of it. In Golang, interior pointers are made possible
by a non-moving collector that allocates everything into blocks based on size.
A bump allocator cannot allocate into size-based blocks though. By definition,
it is required to allocate objects of many varying sizes into one big
contiguous nursery.

# Solution A

One possible solution is to build a bitset of the nursery that indicates where
all objects start. If 8-byte alignment is required for each object, then the
bitset would be 64 times smaller than the actual nursery. A 1MB nursery would
require a 16KB bitset. The size of the bitset could probably be reduced by
using a scheme like roaring to compress it. When it comes time to collect the
nursery, all objects are checked against this bitset. The bitset itself could
be built as allocating was happening, or the build could be deferred. If it
were deferred, then at allocation time, all allocations of objects that
supported interior pointers would additionally push their base address onto
a stack. At collection time, this stack would be converted to a bitset for
faster lookup.

There are two drawbacks to this scheme, neither of which are too serious,
but they should be noted:

1. At collection time, this scheme must enumerate an array of all allocated
   objects that support interior pointers. This defies expectation about
   the impact dead objects typically have on nurseries. This can be ameliorated
   by building the bitset as we allocate instead of deferring the build.
2. At collection time, objects that do not support interior pointers suffer
   overhead that they do not suffer in traditional nursery schemes. We must
   check the bitset for them (walking backwards until we find the beginning
   of the object).

# Solution B

**Note**: I am not sure if this is a good idea. This allows us to avoid
drawback 2, but I'm not sure if drawback 2 would seriously impact performance
in any real workloads.

The solution I propose is an extension of the runtime-rep system described
on 2021-07-15. The original system was:

    data Rep = Box | Word | Float

I propose breaking boxed data into two different representations, one for
objects that support interior pointers and one for objects that do not:

    data Rep = Box | Slice | Word | Float

The term "Slice" implies that it is possible to slice into the object.
Arrays and objects with small unpacked arrays inhabit this representation.
At collection time, we have access to the representations of everything.
By tracking which objects are slices, we can know whether or not we need
to query the bitset.
