# Data Constructors in Typed IR

I've been working on a typed IR that only has one integral type
(64-bit signed integer) but has many boxed types. This means that, by this
stage in the pipeline, there would not be a `PersonId` type that is distinct
from `Int`. It is helpful to track information about boxed types (rather
than just saying that they are all value of type `Box`) because it makes
a C backend generate much cleaner output. The hygiene of C output is
important because it makes debugging it easier.

On 2021-09-09, I journaled about what `struct` definitions might be
appropriate for a C backend. Since then, I've found that those definitions
are pretty good, but the upcast/downcast machinery suggested in the
same journal entry seems like a bad bet since it means that the IR cannot
be typechecked. Instead, what I've been experimenting with is a type
system that gives you a new identifier with a refined type when you
case on boxed data. For example:

    headDef : List Int -> Int
    headDef xs = case xs of
      List{ys} -> ys.head
      Nil -> 0

Above, the type of `xs` is `List Int`, which is shorthand for
`List Int {Cons,Nil}`, and the type of `ys` is `List Int {Cons}`.
This fits nicely into a language that supports refinement types.
The `head` accessor projects out a field and has a type like:

    head : List a {Cons} -> a

How does this all compile down to C though? From the earlier journal entry,
we had these C types:

    struct metadata_t { int32_t refCount; };
    struct list_t { struct metadata_t metadata ; int32_t tag; };
    struct cons_t { struct list_t list; int64_t head; struct list_t* tail; };
    struct nil_t { struct list_t list; };

When casing, this is straightforward. The `headDef` function should do this:

    int64_t headDef(struct list_t* xs) {
      switch(xs->tag) {
        case 1: ;
          struct cons_t* ys = (struct cons_t*)xs;
          return ys->head;
        case 0: ;
          return 0;
        default:
          exit(1); // should not happen
      }
    }

What about upcasting? We need to go from `struct cons_t*` to `struct list_t*`
sometimes. In C, we have to know where to put these casts, so in our IR,
these casts need to be explicit. But only the upcasts. Downcasting is implied
by casing, and it only happens there. Upcasting, by contrast, should be able
to happen nearly anywhere.

The most obvious solution is to just track these casts. This can be done in
a higher-level language even if the casts are done implicitly. This does not
need to be done for refinements on integers since those casts do not show
up in the C backend (or in any backend for that matter).

# Data Constructors with Common Fields

Let's go a little further with this. Sometimes, data constructors will be
similar in ways that we might want to exploit. I am aware of at least two
different ways that this happens:

1. Same field. Two or more data constructors for the same type have an
   identical field.
2. Array of fields. Two or more data constructor have an array of fields
   as the payload. The arrays may be of different length.

An example that highlights both of these is a data type for primitive
primitive operations that forces the number of arguments to be correct.

   data Primop
      = Add Atom Atom
      | Multiply Atom Atom
      | Subtract Atom Atom
      | ...

I wish I could think of better examples for this though. But, basically,
the idea is that you might want to be able to match multiple data constructors
with similar fields:

    case p of
      Add | Subtract {op} -> ...
        // Here, op.0 and op.1 are available, and op has
        // type Primop {Add,Subtract}. Additionally, op.children
        // can be used as an array. Maybe. Less sure of that.

I think it should be possible to support this, but the user needs to specify
when they are writing the data type whether or not they would like this
behavior since it might impact field layout.

Oh, here's another example. What if you have an expression type that is
often enriched by something, maybe its type or information about
if it is known to be terminating or if it allocates:

    data Term
      = Lit Int
      | Let Id Term Term
      | App Term Term 
      | Plus Term Term
      | Lam Id Type Term

One way to add information to this is to wrap every `Term` inside a functor: 

    data Term f
      = Lit Int
      | Let Id (f (Term f)) (f (Term f))
      | App (f (Term f)) (f (Term f))
      | Plus (f (Term f)) (f (Term f))
      | Lam Id Type (f (Term f))
    data WithType a = WithType Type a

Now, when `f` is `Identity`, we recover our original type, and when `f` is
`WithType`, everything is annotated. You can go further and factor out the
recursion if you want:

    data Term a
      = Lit Int
      | Let Id a a
      | App a a
      | Plus a a
      | Lam Id Type a
    data Fix f = Fix (f (Fix f))
    data TypedTerm a = TypedTerm Type a
    type UnannotatedTerm = Fix Term
    type AnnotatedTerm = Fix TypedTerm

The problem with both of these is that they have bad ergonomics (two layers)
and bad performance (poor cache locality). Instead, we might try:

    data Term a
      = Lit a Int
      | Let a Id (Term a) (Term a)
      | App a (Term a) (Term a)
      | Plus a (Term a) (Term a)
      | Lam a Id Type (Term a)

And then we can set `a` to either unit or `Type`. In Haskell, if we did this,
then consulting the type of a `Term` would cost us a pattern match. However,
in the language I'm thinking of, our accessors would look like this:

    lit  : Term a {Lit} -> Int
    body : Term a {Let} -> Id
    expr : Term a {Let} -> Term a
    bndr : Term a {Let} -> Term a
    anno : Term a {Lit,Let,App,Plus,Lam} -> Term a

That is, any `Term` can have its annotation accessed without being scrutinized.
