# Tracking Allocations in Second-Order Functional Language

Here are two common second-order functions:

    map  : (a -> b) -> Array a -> Array b
    fold : (b -> a -> b) -> b -> Array a -> b

One difference between them at runtime is that the first one needs to allocate
and the second one does not. Why is tracking whether or not a function
allocates useful?

* If the function needs to use a lot of registers, the register that normally
  holds the heap pointer can be freed up.
* There are scheduling strategies that interleave computation with data
  constructor initialization that only work when the computations for the
  fields do not allocate.

How could this be tracked in a type system? Simply by marking each function
as allocating or non-allocating. If second-order functions are implemented
by specialization, then the resulting function would be "combine" the
allocating status of the base function and of all function arguments
to it. For example, `map` applied to anything would be allocating. However,
`fold (\acc n -> acc + n)` (i.e. summing the array) would not be allocating,
but `fold (\acc n -> Cons n acc)` would be allocating.

# Things That Happen at the Same Time

Think about an expression like:

    let w = myArr[11]
        x = myArr[55]
        y = x + 22
        z = myArr[x + 1]
        a = Foo y z
        b = Foo x y
        c = Foo w z
     in ...

The operations are sufficiently primitive that instructions can be scheduled
in basically any order as long as dependencies come before their uses. This
is kind of neat. Generally, it is good to sink loads (move them to right
before the value is actually used) and to sink computations whose result
is stored. In the above example, the only operations are:

* Addition
* Indexing into array (load)
* Allocation (store)

There are other operations that may introduce scheduling barriers:

* Branching (`let x = if b then ... else ...`).
* Function calls

Any time that control flow diverges, there is a path that cannot be
interleaved with everything else. How do we decide when to hop onto
this path?
