# GHC Event Manager

A few years ago, I tried to make some changes to the GHC event manager.
I ended up giving up on the changes, but these are some thoughts that I
had while working on it:

1. The GHC event manager has a part of its implementation that is swapped
   out based on whether `poll` or `epoll` or `kqueue` is available. This
   is done with a dictionary (`GHC.Event.Internal.Backend`), which implies
   dynamic dispatch. It doesn't make sense to do this this way since only
   one of the backends is actually used. Instead, it is possible to do this
   by passing a different module based on the detected operating system.
   Then, the called functions are resolved statically, which makes
   worker-wrapper start working. This prevents boxed of all integral arguments
   to these functions. I did this in a MR that included a bunch of other
   unrelated changes, and this part worked well. Changing this is probably
   not controversial. 
2. The GHC event manager has a least-common-denominator design. Since it
   does not assume that anything more than `poll` is available, all consumers
   of it use `epoll` (and presumably `kqueue` although I have not confirmed this)
   in level-triggered mode rather than edge-triggered mode. There is probably
   not a good way to change this without dropping support for operating systems
   that only offer `poll`. I'm not sure what situation Windows is in here.
   Changing this would be controversial.
3. The GHC event manager allow registration of arbitrary callbacks, but in
   practice, only two callbacks are used: filling an `MVar` and filling a
   `TVar`. One possible redesign would involve having registration accepting
   a transactional variable (either a `TVar` or an `MVar`) instead of an
   arbitrary callback. This has a slightly lighter allocation footprint.
   Also, running arbitrary callbacks on the thread that is handling events
   is somewhat dangerous. If the callback blocks, waiting for an event, it
   could deadlock the program. Changing this would be controversial, and it
   would probably break something.

Relatedly, in the last two years, I've found that, for my work, runtimes with
green threads and general purpose event managers (GHC and golang) provide
no value. They make it easy to perform a large (10K+) number of
low-computational-complexity network-bound tasks at the same time. Applications
that benefit from this include web scrapers, large network scans
(like scanning `10.0.0.0/8`), and HTTP services that need to handle a ton of
simultaneous clients and are essentially proxies to other network resources.
But I don't work on things like this. All of my applications need a small
number (under 100) of network sockets open at any given point in time.

Now I'm getting off into less related territory, but an interesting
alternative to a general-purpose event manager would be a service-specific
event manager. Something like just an event manager for HTTP. So the consumer
wouldn't ask "let me know when I can call `recv`". It would ask "give me an
entire HTTP request, parsed into headers and body, all at once". And the
consumer would block until the manager was ready. This doesn't work great
for chunked transfer, but chunked transfer is uncommon. The manager would
be doing a combination of `epoll` (or whatever the OS provides) and HTTP
request parsing.
