# Linear Arrays Inside of Objects

I keep coming back to this idea even though it doesn't seem like it will
work out. One thing that is unsatisfying about ownership types as implemented
in rust is how about the user has to use `unsafe`. What's weird is that
other forms of abstraction don't suffer from this to the same extent. For
example, GHC offers `unsafeCoerce` for situations where the type system
is inadequate. However, this monster of a function is almost never needed.
Is it possible to build data structures on top of linear arrays without
having to cheat? Let's try.

First example is qptries. I'm using 64-bit numbers as keys and including
the key in each branch as well:

    data Branch*
      { mask : U16
      , key : U64
      , index : I32
      , size : S8 // must be popcnt(mask)
      , children : Array* Branch* // note: this is a C flexible member
      }

Above, the `Branch*` type must be used linearly. Lets consider how insertion
might work (using underscores for places where I'm being too lazy to write
some code):

    insert : U64 -> Value* -> Branch* -> Branch*
    insert k v br =
      nybble = k[br.index,4]
      case br.mask[nybble]:
        True:
          alter br:
            mask: unchanged
            key: unchanged
            index: unchanged
            size: unchanged
            children[child <- _]: insert k v child
        False:
          leaf = alloc Leaf{_} 
          alloc Branch:
            mask: setBit(br.mask,nybble)
            key: br.key
            index: br.index
            size: br.size + 1
            children: insert(br.children,_,leaf)

If it's not already there, then we really do have to make a new branch node.
There simply is not enough space in the old branch node. But if it was
already there, then we just need to modify the element in the array. This
"modify the child" trick requires a ton of special support from the
language. Let's talk about the use of uniquness though. Since we know
that we have a unique reference to `br`, we can inspect it (read from it)
and then modify it later. Reading a non-unique field is fine, but reading
a unique field would not be alright.

This isn't working. Darn.
