# Alternative to State Token for Sequencing

Section 2.8 of Tackling the Awkward Squad describes two approaches to dealing
with IO in a compiler IR. One is state tokens (what GHC does), and the other
is "keep the monad right through" (the paper's language). I want to explore
what this second approach might actually look like. Here is a simple IR
without support for sequenced operations:

    data Atom
      = Lit Int
      | Var Id
    data Evaluation
      = Apply FuncId (List Atom)
      | Case Id [Alternative]
    data Term
      -- Note: This definition makes Term a list of assignments. This is
      -- fine, but one way to improve this is to add a Case data constructor
      -- to Term to support branching that doesn't join back up.
      = Let Id Evaluation Term
      | Value Atom
    data Alternative = Alternative
      { pat :: Int
      , arm :: Term
      }

It's possible to instead represent `Term` as a partially ordered set of
let bindings, which makes non-commitment to a particular order more apparant. 
How do we integrate monadic IO into this? We want the resulting langage
to be easy to lower to C or LLVM or assembly. Also, the partial ordering
is not an option. One option is to nearly duplicate all the types
(except `Atom`):

    data EvaluationM = ...   -- same as before
    data AlternativeM = ...  -- same as before
    data TermM
      = Bind Id EvaluationM TermM
      | Let Id Evaluation TermM
      | Pure Atom

Notice that `TermM` gets an extra data constructor. We have to be able
to lift uneffectful expressions into an effectful context. As before,
we could allow this `Let` data constructor be a partially ordered set
of bindings, but `Bind` must not be implemented this way.

This implementation is a little unusual because it does not allow
arbitrary `Term`s to be lifted. Instead, it only allows `Evaluation`
to be lifted. The disadvantage of this is that inlining a pure
expression into an impure one is a multi-step operation that truly
duplicates the original. The advantage, however, is that lowering
is simple. Compiling any of the above data types to C code is
straightforward.

# Join Points

Alright, let's go ahead and think about this because it will matter. Where
should be able to put join points? We need to be able to put them on
the RHS of a let binding because we need to be able to support expressions
like this:

    let x = label finish(z) = ...
            in case a of
                 1 -> jump finish(5)
                 2 -> jump finish(10)
                 _ -> 6

We also need recursive join points for things like this:

    let x = label go(acc,n) = case n of
                    1 -> acc
                    _ ->
                      let acc' = n * acc
                          n' = n - 1
                       in jump go(acc',n')
            in go(1,z)

This complicates things somewhat. Now, a let-bound variable may been assigned
to something that begins with labels. Essentially, this means that any
expression may be on the RHS:

    data Term
      = Let Id Term Term
      | Apply FuncId (List Atom)
      | Case Id [Alternative]
      | Label
          LabelId -- Name
          [Id] -- Arguments
          Term -- Join point body
          Term
      | Value Atom
      | Jump LabelId [Atom]

I hoped that it would be possible to avoid this, but I'm not sure that it is.
What happens to monadically sequenced terms?

    data TermM
      = Bind Id TermM TermM
      | Let Id Term TermM
      | ApplyM MonadicFuncId (List Atom)
      | CaseM Id [AlternativeM]
      | LabelM
          LabelId -- Name
          [Id] -- Arguments
          TermM -- Join point body
          TermM
      | Pure Atom
      | JumpM LabelId [Atom]

The `TermM` data type is a copy of `Term` but with an extra data constructor
that allows embedding `Term`. There's no way for a join point (a `Label`)
defined in an embedded pure term to escape and become available in the
surrounding impure term, which is good. Pure expressions may be trivially
embedded in impure ones using `Let`.

The types can be consolidated using GADTs:

    data Effectfulness = Effectful | Noneffectful
    data Term : Effectfulness -> Type where
      Let : Id -> Term Noneffectful -> Term e -> Term e -- corresponds to TermM's Let and Term's Let
      Bind : Id -> Term Effectful -> Term Effectful -> Term Effectful
      Apply : FuncId e -> List Atom -> Term e -- functions tagged by effectfulness
      Case : Id -> List (Alternative e) -> Term e
      Label :
           LabelId -- Name
        -> List Id -- Arguments
        -> Term e -- Join point body
        -> Term e
      Pure : Atom -> Term e
      Jump : LabelId -> List Atom -> Term e

Cool.
