# B-Tree Layout and Compressed Pointers

I had previously thought about the persistent B-Trees as having a layout
like this:

    BranchW64 : W64x8 -> {n : Int | n <= 9} -> Array n (Node h v) -> Node (h + 1) v
    BranchW32 : W32x8 -> {n : Int | n <= 9} -> Array n (Node h v) -> Node (h + 1) v
    BranchW16 : W16x8 -> {n : Int | n <= 9} -> Array n (Node h v) -> Node (h + 1) v

And so on for smaller words. The disadvantage of this layout is that it
requires wasting space for unused keys. Also, having multiple variable-length
arrays in a heap object is not an option. It makes accessing the objects
weird and non-uniform. Here is another possibility:

    BranchW64 : {n : Int | n <= 9} -> Array n <W64,Node h v> -> Node (h + 1) v
    BranchW32 : {n : Int | n <= 9} -> Array n <W32,Node h v> -> Node (h + 1) v
    BranchW16 : {n : Int | n <= 9} -> Array n <W16,Node h v> -> Node (h + 1) v

This avoids wasting space, but now there is a weird question about alignment.
How big should each element in the array be? How big are pointers? 64 bits?
32 bits? 48 bits? There are several options here. Saving memory really is
a big deal, but it would be nice to not make loads take way longer. There
are several cases that happen to work out nicely:

* If pointers are 32 bits, then `<W32,Ptr>` is 64 bits.
* If pointers are 48 bits, then `<W16,Ptr>` is 64 bits.

But the other cases that are tricky. On modern architectures, unaligned loads
should work fine, but 48-bit loads are still not possible with a single
instruction. You would have to do a 64-bit load and then mask out the
unwanted bits. So, an operation like:

    x := myPtrArr[n]

becomes

    tmp1 := myPtrArr + (n * 6)
    tmp2 := tmp1 - 2
    tmp3 := load64(tmp2)
    x := and(tmp3,0x0000FFFFFFFFFFFF)

And it is a little different depending on endianness. The "minus 2" might not be
needed. But writing these values out is going to be horribly difficult because
you have to preserve the 16 bits that show up beside it in memory.

Since trying to pack things that way seems terrible, here is another possibility:
pointer compression for cache-line-aligned pointers. For objects that are 64-byte
aligned, a 32-bit index could handle a 256 GB heap. That's pretty big, but it
does not help for the leaf nodes, which can refer to things other that nodes
in the tree.

Another possibility is, for branches that use 32 or 64 bits to represent the
key, use the representation that interleaves them (saving space). And then
for 16-bit or 8-bit keys, use the representation that reserves too much
space for the keys.

It really would be nice though if there were a trick for making pointers only
take 48 bits. Normally (in data constructors), that's probably not a worthwhile
trick for saving space, but with an array of pointers, I suspect that could
could come out ahead. For inserting into an array, you would have to perform
3 16-bit stores, but then there is still just a single `memcpy` to scoot the
rest of the array over. A 48-bit pointer can do byte-level addressing on around
280TB, which is bigger than anything this could be used for. So I think that
something like this would do well:

    -- Wastes space when pointers are 32 bits.
    BranchW64 : {n : Int | n <= 9} -> Array n <W64,Node h v> -> Node (h + 1) v
    -- Wastes space when pointers are 64 bits.
    BranchW32 : {n : Int | n <= 9} -> Array n <W32,Node h v> -> Node (h + 1) v
    -- Wastes up to 8 bytes of space. (Half of the W16x8)
    BranchW16 : W16x8 -> {n : Int | n <= 9} -> Array n (Squeeze (Node h v)) -> Node (h + 1) v
    -- Wastes up to 4 bytes of space. (Half of the W16x4)
    BranchW8  : W8x8  -> {n : Int | n <= 9} -> Array n (Squeeze (Node h v)) -> Node (h + 1) v

On second thought, maybe `BranchW32` should overallocate for keys too. The
max wasted space would be 16 bytes, but then you wouldn't end up with an array
of 96-bit elements (must be padded to 128-bit elements) when using a large
address space. So you do not really come out badly here.

But also, consistency is king. So probably the best would be to just

* Do the same thing everywhere. That is, overallocate for keys.
* Pick a different max `n` for each key size. `W64` would probably
  get `KEYS = 4`, and `W8` would probably get `KEYS = 16`
  (`16 * 1 + 17 * 6 = 118`, which is less than two cache lines).
  Everything else gets something in between.
* Compress pointers in the array field to 48 bits. This saves 2 bytes
  per pointer. This doesn't amount to a ton of saved space (saves
  2MB for map with 1M key-value pairs), but it does let us pack a
  little more onto each cache line. For a 32-bit address space,
  this is a moot point.
