# Function Arrows with Monadic Effects

Vectors have a lovely `generate` function that has at least two flavors:

    generate  :            (n : Nat) -> (Int {>=0,<n} ->   a) ->    Vector {n} a
    generateM : Monad m => (n : Nat) -> (Int {>=0,<n} -> m a) -> m (Vector {n} a)

The second one is tricky to implement in Haskell because you want the monadic
context to commute with `ST` (or something like commuting). Here is a thought
for how to unify these in a language that augments arrows with effects:
 
    generate : (n : Nat) -> (Int {>=0,<n} ->{m} a) ->{m} Vector {n} a

Not bad. If the type system puts serious constraints on monads (disallowing
anything non-linear), then it should be possible to introduce and eliminate
the `ST` effect inside of `generate` itself.

Here's something odd: the function argument depends on the `Nat` argument
but it doesn't actually use it. This means that we cannot perform a partial
application to just the function. We must supply the `Nat` as well. This
is weird and results in lost opportunities to share generated code. If,
however, we provide less information to the callback, then we could recover
the additional opportunities for partial application. For example:

    generate : (n : Nat) -> (Int {>=0} ->{m} a) ->{m} Vector {n} a

Now, the callback doesn't know anything about `n`. This means that
we could apply `generate` to `identity` to get a function of type:

    identity : a -> a
    generate _ identity : (n : Nat) -> Vector {n} Int{>=0}
      (m = Identity, a = Int{>=0})

Notice that, in doing this, we lose information about the elements
in the resulting vector. This is a shame, but it's not the worst
thing in the world.

I think I'm wrong about that. In argument position, the following
relationship holds:

    (Int ->{m} T)  :<  (Int {>=0,<n} ->{m} T)

Why is this? Because the function arrow inverts subtyping. Clearly,
a function that can consume any integer should be able to be used
when we only needed a function that that could consume a subset of
the integers. That partially addresses the issue. But the other issue,
losing the additional information about the output vector, was I think
just wrong. Consider the very general definitions:

    identity : a ->{m} a
    generate : (n : Nat) -> (Int {>=0,<n} ->{m} a) ->{m} Vector {n} a
    generate _ identity : ???
      (generate _ identity === \n -> generate n identity)
      ==>
      (n : Nat) ->{m} Vector {n} a

What happens when we go to synthesize the type? The missing nat argument
becomes an argument in the resulting function. The identity function has
a subtype of the expected function type. Everything works out. 

Any pure function can be considered to work in any context. This is kind
of annoying that these two are isomorphic:

    (n : Nat) ->{m} Vector {n} a
    (n : Nat) ->{Identity} Vector {n} a

I think it is better to prefer the second form when dealing with first-order
functions. With higher-order functions, being explicit is mandatory. You
have to know which arrows have matching monadic effects.

# Heterogeneous Arrays

What if you have an array where all the elements are boxed, but what they
are depends on what index they're at? How could a type system handle this?

    index : (n : Nat) -> (interpret : Nat{<n} -> Type) -> HeterogeneousArray {n} interpret -> (i : Nat{<n}) -> interpret i

This has the horrible feel of dependently typed awfulness. Darn.
