# Array of Struct in Garbage-Collected Language

In C, a programmer has access to arrays of structures. Such an array is
declared as

    struct foo foos[10];

Garbage-collected languages tend to lack such a construct. The notable
exception is golang. Golang accomplishes this in part by eschewing
polymorphism. In a setting with support for polymorphism, how should
this work?

The first step is to decide what the different flavors of arrays are.
The usual suspects are array of pointers, array of 64-bit words, etc.
The array of structs is something rather different though. For everything
else, an element is one word. That is, an element fits in a register.
For the arrays of structs, an element is several words. In a polymorphic
setting, we want to be able to keep these behind a pointer for as long as
possible and then memcpy what's behind the pointer into the array when we
go to write an element. Let's think about runtime representations:

    data Rep = Box | Word

We really don't want to add another representation because pointers
participating in arrays of structs really are just `Box`. Since that's
off the table, the best option is just a different kind of array:

    BoxedArray : Box -> Box
    FlatArray  : Box -> Box
    WordArray  : Word -> Box

What's unfortunate about this is that everything other than `Box` just has
one way to do an array. We want to just be able to write a function like:

    swap : forall (r : Rep) (a : r). Array {r} a -> Int -> Int -> Array {r} a

And then have this function work on all array types. But with two different
options for boxed arrays, the representation is no longer enough to tell us
what type of array to use. Maybe this is ok. `FlatArray` has very different
behavior. High-performance users will typically want to allocate an element
on the stack and then pass that stack pointer into a function that eventually
copies it into an array. Writes perform multi-word copies, and reads return
interior pointers.

Under this strategy, a signature for cache-coherent maps with 64-bit keys
and unknown values would look like this:

    signature array =
    sig
      rep r : Rep
      type arr : r -> Box

      val index  : arr a -> Nat -> a
      val insert : arr a -> Nat -> a -> arr a
      ...
    end

It would be useful to additionally have a `fanout` parameter. One problem with
this is that it makes unpacking the array into the data constructor difficult
because the type `arr` is unknown. I don't like this approach.

Another option is putting more magic into `Array` rather than `Rep`. Instead
of having `Array` as:

    Array : forall (r : Rep). (a : r) -> Box

We could have:

    data Flatness : Rep -> Box where
      Flattened : Flatness Box
      Unflattened : Flatness r
    Array : forall (r : Rep). Flatness r -> (a : r) -> Box

This gives rise to these types:

    Array Unflattened Word
    Array Unflattened Foo
    Array Flattened Foo

Importantly, the type `Array Flattened Word` does not typecheck. This is good
because we do not want two different ways to talk about arrays of words, but
we do want two ways to talk about arrays of boxed things.

What's powerful about this approach is that it can be adapted to include the
size of the boxed type in the `Flattened` data constructor. It is unclear to
me whether or not doing this is a good idea. The advantage of doing this is
that it makes it trivial to produce specializations for each size. It falls
right out of monomorphization. That means that the runtime doesn't have to
lookup the size of the object every time it indexing into the array. The
disadvantage is that more implementation details leak into types. Another
disadvantage is that the typechecking gets more complicated since the size
needs to be correct.

    data Flatness : (r : Rep) -> r -> Box where
      Flattened : forall (r : Rep) (a : r). (Nat | _ = sizeof a) -> Flatness r a
      -- ^ Argument is either just the size or maybe a combination of
      -- size and alignment.
      Unflattened : forall (r : Rep) (a : r). Flatness r a
    Array : forall (r : Rep). (a : r) -> Flatness r a -> Box

And now we have types like this:

    Array Word Unflattened
    Array Foo Unflattened
    Array Foo (Flattened 24)

This is truly awful. It's also not really useful when working with arrays of
compressed structs. (Compressed arrays have variable-sized elements and require
rediscovering sizes at runtime anyway.) Let's think about arrays of compressed
integers (we would use `varint` or something similar):

    data Flatness : Rep -> Box where
      Flattened : Flatness Box
      Unflattened : Flatness r
      Compressed : Flatness Word

Compressed arrays have a huge problem of not supporting efficient indexing. They
also do not work when the array is mutable. We probably need to track support for
mutability:

    data Mutability = Mutable | Immutable
    data Flatness : Rep -> Mutability -> Box where
      Flattened : Flatness Box m
      Unflattened : Flatness r m
      Compressed : Flatness Word Immutable
    type function Decompress : Flatness r Immutable -> Flatness r Mutable
    Array : forall (r : Rep). (m : Mutability) -> (a : r) -> Flatness a m -> Box
    thaw : Array Immutable a f -> IO (Array Mutable a (Decompress f))
    index : Array Immutable a f -> Int -> a

The resulting system is pleasant. It needs a little polish to bring down the
noise in the `Array` type constructor. In particular, it would be nice to be
able to write:

    Array Int -- default is uncompressed
    Array {compressed} Int
    Array Foo -- default is to use pointers, i.e. Unflattened
    Array {unpack} Foo
    Array {mutable s} Foo -- mutable array of Foo, used with ST
    Array {mutable} Foo -- mutable array of Foo, used with IO
    Array {mutable s, unpack} Foo -- mutable array of unpacked Foo, used with ST

One last thought. We could even add `Utf8` to `Flatness` so that `Array Char`
so that the all of the folds that work on arrays would also work on text.


