# Memory Tricks in Linux

In Linux, you can ask for `mmap` to use hugepages with:

    mmap(NULL, 1024 * 1024 * 6, PROT_READ | PROT_WRITE, MAP_PRIVATE | MAP_ANONYMOUS | MAP_HUGETLB | MAP_HUGE_2MB, -1, 0)

The above command will request 3 2MB hugepages from the operating system. For
this to work, you may need to use `hugeadm` to make sure that the operating
system has created the pages.

POSIX threads allow you to control the addresses use for the stack with
`pthread_attr_setstack`. If you do this, you have to manually set up
a guard page at the end of the stack. You probably want a guard page.

Unfortunately, it is not possible to have the thread stacks backed by huge
pages unless you give up on having a guard page. Creating a guard page requires
using `mprotect` to make a 4KB page unwriteable. However, Linux does not
allow users to set permissions on part of a hugepage. This makes sense
since `mprotect`ing part of a hugepage would split the page up. You get
`EINVAL` if you try to do this.

If you give up guard pages, then you could get thread stacks to live
on hugepages. But giving up guard pages sounds like a bad idea.

Wait. There is actually a way to make this work. If all of your
thread stacks are 2MB, then you could alternate between 2MB hugepages
and 2MB `PROT_NONE`. That would work. This requires really large
stacks though. 2MB is way more than you should normally need for
a stack. For many applications, something like 256KB or 512KB is
sufficient. If an application only needs 256KB of stack per thread,
then a 2MB stack wastes 1.75MB per thread, which is egregious. The
footprint of a 100-thread application would be around 175MB larger
than it needed to be.

I suppose that any runtime that wanted to make this flexible would
need to provide two options:

* A small-stack option that gave you 256KB (or whatever) stacks backed
  by 4KB pages.
* A large-stack option that gives 2MB (or 4MB or 8MB) stacks backed
  by 2MB hugepages.

These numbers are all very specific to Intel x86 and Linux.

Also, the main thread is special in POSIX and cannot be set up the same
way as any of the other threads. To control the stack size of the main
thread, follow the advice from [this SO answer](https://stackoverflow.com/a/18912422/1405768):

    cc -Wl,-stack_size -Wl,0x1000000 -o test test.m

Notice that it is the linker, not the compiler, that sets this. In most
C programs, the libc implementation (basically either glibc or musl)
gets to choose the default size of posix threads created after the
application starts.

The [Linux Kernel Overcommit Accounting](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/v4.18/vm/overcommit-accounting.html)
documentation mentions a gotcha:

> The C language stack growth does an implicit mremap. If you want absolute
> guarantees and run close to the edge you MUST mmap your stack for the
> largest size you think you will need. For typical stack usage this does
> not matter much but it's a corner case if you really really care.

So, basically, it's saying that if you disable overcommit and you
use most of the system memory, you will want to go ahead and get the
stack committed early in the application. If you don't, then when
your stack grows, you will get an application-killing out-of-memory
notification (maybe a segfault or some other signal?). This is worse
than having `mmap` tell you that there is no more memory available
because at least when `mmap` reports that, you can do something about
it, like logging something or trying to release committed memory.

However, this documentation does not explain how to "mmap your stack".
I'm guessing that if you might be able to use `alloca` and then scribble
all over it to force the `mremap`. That seems ridiculous though because
it is difficult to know how much to `alloca` to get all the pages mapped.

Nevermind, I found what I was looking for. The man page for `ld` documents
a `--stack` option:

> `--stack` reserve,commit  
> Specify the number of bytes of memory to reserve (and optionally commit)
> to be used as stack for this program. The default is 2Mb reserved,
> 4K committed. [This option is specific to the i386 PE targeted port of
> the linker]

Nevermind, this option [does not work on Linux](https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=86451).
It appears that `alloca` is that only way.
