# Lith

I've been working on an IR called lith. It's a lambda calculus without lambda
that targets C and strives to generate readable C code. Things I've realized
while working on this:

* Compiling join points to C requires using `goto` and labels. There are a few
  special cases where it can be compiled to something more pleasant. Notably,
  a recursive join point can often be a while loop.
* Arrays are not that hard to deal with. Having an array in a data constructor
  makes allocation in C a little trickier. These allocations cannot be
  performed inline, although most allocations can. Temporary variables
  are a decent solution here. I try to avoid these when possible since they
  make the generated C code unreadable. But in this case, I think they should
  be alright.
* The IR should require that `case` on a boxed type be applied to a variable. 
  This is because the pointer needs to be casted in the arms.
* Backpack (a module system) is a pretty good way to annotate a syntax tree.
  I've been pleased with how ergonomic the result is compared to more
  traditional Haskell approaches.
* Projecting fields from records ties renaming and typechecking together
  somewhat. I'm fine with this though.
* You have to know the types of lots of things to generate C code. These
  are needed for both explicit casts and for variable declarations (C has
  no type inference). You also have to know what things will be named in C.
  Right now, I just hack around this by having functions, types, and fields
  all be identified by numbers, and the corresponding C names are just
  hardcoded into resolution functions that crash if they cannot find
  the right identifier. I don't like this. I discuss what I'd like to do below.

Generally, I feel like this project is headed in a good direction. Adding
features is straightforward. Now for the big change I'm thinking about.

In the next iteration, this needs to be able to read actual source code
and not have everything hardcoded. The identifiers in the source language
need to be mapped to numbers (but the identifiers should be preserved
somewhere). All optimization on the IR would happen on the representation
that just used numbers for everything. No strings anywhere. The big map
that converts numbers to identifiers only gets brought back out when
we display something to the user (we don't want to show the user the numbers)
or when we generate C code.

Field projection is a little tricky because we cannot assign projected fields 
a number until we are typechecking. I dislike this because, if we end up
generating lith (the IR) from a higher-level language, we would want to
already have resolved fields to numbers. So, we need two different
type checkers for lith. One assumes everything is already resolved.
