# Just Three Representations

GHC provides a `RuntimeRep` type with lots of data constructors. I think that,
for a strict language, we really only need three:

    data Rep = Box | Word | Float

Let's motivate this distinction. OCaml unifies these two and uses the high bit
of each word to distinguish them. This means that words are only 63 bits and
that most arithmetic has to mask out an upper bit and then add it back. Another
strategy, used by the MLton compiler, is to create different copies of each
function at the type it is instantiated at. MLton does this for every type
though, not just for every representation.

What about `Word8`, `Word16`, etc.? Represented in registers and on the stack,
these are all handled the same way as `Word`. The only place things are different
is when we are dealing with arrays or with data constructors on the heap. For
data constructors, a refinement is sufficient to instruct the compiler:

    data Person = PersonC
      { age : (Nat | _ < 256)
      , height : (Nat | _ < 65536)
      }

This works well when fields are monomorphic. When fields are polymorphic, we
cannot save space. For example:

    data Person a = PersonC
      { age : a
      , height : (Nat | _ < 65536)
      }
    type YoungPerson = Person (Nat | _ < 256)

Now, a young person's age will take the full 8 bytes rather than the 1 byte
that it took earlier. I think this compromise is acceptable. Arrays are a
little trickier. We need:

    BoxedArray  : Box -> Box
    FlatArray   : Box -> Box -- lay out objects contiguously
    Word64Array : Word -> Box
    Word32Array : Word -> Box
    Word16Array : Word -> Box
    Word8Array  : Word -> Box

The intent is that the user apply `Word8Array` to a type that only uses numbers
less than 256. For example:

    Word8Array (Nat | _ < 256)
    Word8Array MyEnum

Trying to enforce this in the type system leads to complications. Nearly
all user-defined enum types have fewer than 256 constructors, but there is
no good place to communicate this in type system. One natural way to do this
is with kinds (i.e. the runtime rep), but I don't really want `Word16` and
`Word8` to have different representations since all machines that I care
about targeting store values of these types in the same registers. The option
I lean toward is just pushing the burden of getting this right on the user.

# Slicing

There are several interesting ways to encode arrays that do not support
slicing. Encodings like `VARINT-GB` group elements into blocks. This is great
for processors with the right SIMD instructions. But grouping elements into
blocks makes slicing so cumbersome that it's not really worth supporting.
Here are the tiers some array-related features to break into several signatures:

1. Random Access (elements are fixed width)
2. Blocks of elements (supports multi-element folding,
   SIMD-accelerated zipping of heterogenous arrays possible,
   special `foreach` keyword should target this)  
3. Slicing
4. Collections (support element-at-a-time folding)

As a lattice, these look like this:

      1
     / \
    2   3
     \  
      4

Random access implies all of the others. Equiping a random-access data
structure with an offset gives you a data structure that supports slicing.
And since random access essentially requires that elements are fixed width,
it also trivially supports folding fixed-size blocks.

Let's describe the "blocks of elements" property a little more. There are
two ways this can happen:

1. Decoding reveals a variable number of elements (no more than perhaps
   4, 8, or 16 of them), sets a mask register, and updates the offset.
2. Decoding reveals an exact number of elements (probably 4, 8, or 16)
   and updates the offset. No mask register is needed.

When zipping arrays, only the second option works. However, the first
option can be nice when traversing a single array. If you can decode
a variable number of elements, I think it is always possible to decode
a (smaller) fixed number of elements instead by just throwing away what
was at the end and advancing the offset by less than what you would have.

Is zipping heterogeneous arrays actually useful? I'm not sure.


