# Refinements and Type Constructors

All research that I am aware of on refinement types (or liquid types)
ignores type constructors. Ignoring type constructors is common in papers
that deal with any kind of type-system feature, and the rational is
that it's a detail that will bog down the presentation and that
practioners can probably work it out from the groundwork laid in
the paper.

## Refinements in Types

So, what do refinements look like when you combine them with type constructors?
My first approach to this was allowing types to be equipped with refinements.
This is something that Liquid Haskell supports but does not document.
Consider this:

    // Collection is some map-like type
    sumCollection : Collection {x : Int | x >= 0, x < 100} -> Int

The syntax for this is reasonably clear. We have a `Collection` type
constructor applied to `Int`, making the contained elements integers,
and additionally, the integers must be between 0 and 100. This works,
but there are several arguments against it that I am aware of:

1. Implementation complexity. Types may now contain refinements. The
   question of "are these two types the same" is often not enough
   once types have refinements. We need to be asking "does this
   type subsume this type" instead in many situations. For example,
   we should be able to call `sumCollection` with an argument of
   type `Collection {x : Int | x >= 0, x < 50}`.
2. Multiple ways to express the same thing. Consider a function
   of type `(a : Int) -> (a < 50) -> Foo`. Consider instead the type
   `{x : Int | x < 50} -> Foo`. These express the same
   thing, but the second one pushes the refinement into the type.
3. Insufficient power. Consider a map-like binary type constructor
   `CollectionPair` that takes two arguments `a` and `b`. We may
   want to refine this so that there is some relationship between
   `a` and `b` (e.g. `a` is greater than `b`). We cannot express
   this relationship because the refinements for `a` and `b`
   cannot reference one another. In a general setting, this makes
   sense because an arbitrary type constructor might not have the
   same number of `a` terms and `b` terms inside it, and it is not
   clear which ones are being related.

## Inductively Defined Measurements

None those issues are terrible, but Liquid Haskell has another feature
that accomplishes the same thing but with none of the drawbacks. This
feature is inductively defined measurements, and these are created
with the `measure` keyword. Here is what `sumCollection` would look
like if it were refined this way instead:

    data Collection a = Branch (Collection a) (Collection a) | Leaf a
    allSmall : Collection Int -> Bool
    allSmall (Leaf x) = x >= 0 && x < 100
    allSmall (Collection y z) = allSmall(y) && allSmall(z)
    sumCollection : (c : Collection Int, allSmall(c)) -> Int

One problem with this is that measures are not higher-order.
This means that `allSmall` cannot take another measure function as an
argument. In theory, we should be able to have:

    data Collection a = Branch (Collection a) (Collection a) | Leaf a
    allSatisfy : (a -> Bool) -> Collection a -> Bool
    allSatisfy f (Leaf x) = f x
    allSatisfy f (Collection y z) = allSmall(f,y) && allSmall(f,z)
    sumCollection : (c : Collection Int, allSatisfy(\x -> x >=0 && x < 100, c)) -> Int

But LH does not support this. Instead, it offers abstract refinments.
Abstract refinements attach the abstract predicate to the data type instead.
But functionally, I believe that LH's refined datatype and LH's measures
are equivalent. So, a system supporting the higher-order `allSatisfy`
should be possible.

## Arrays

Let's try out the higher-order measurement on arrays and see what the types
look like:

    data Array : Type -> Type
    index :
         (v : Array a, i : Int, p : a -> Bool)
           | i >= 0, i < len(v), rangeSatisfies(v,i,1,p)
      -> (x : a)
           | p(x)

Instead of an `all` predicate, we have a more narrowly tailored `range`
predicate. Regretably, we must pass `p` as an argument. We may actually
be able to omit the arguments that check that `i` is in bounds since
`rangeSatisfies` would imply that `i` is in bounds. Let's try another
array function:

    write :
         (v : Array a, i : Int, a, p : a -> Bool, low : Int, rng : Int)
           | i >= 0, i < len(v), p(x), rangeSatisfies(v,low,i - low,p), rangeSatisfies(v,ix,rng - (i - low) - 1,p)
      -> (w : a)
           | rangeSatisfies(w,low,rng,p)

This is much more awful. The type of `write` allows the user to supply
an element predicate and a range over which it should be true, and if
that predicate holds for all elements in the range (except for the element
at index `ix`), then the precondition is met. The postcondition is that,
for the new array, all elements in the range satisfy the predicate (including
the newly introduced element).

We might want to additionally use `rangeSatisfies` with the predicate `const True`
to indicate that memory is merely initialized (elements are deterministic
in the range). The above type signature works fine for that use case as well.

## Unusual Predicates

Every element in `xs` is greater than every element in `ys`. Not just the
ones in the same positions. All of them.

    all(xs, \x -> all(ys, \y -> x > y))
    =~=
    exists n. all(xs, \x -> x >= n) && all(ys, \y -> y < n)


