# Bool Arrays

Implementation of boolean arrays commonly represent each boolean with a single bit.
An alternative is to use a full byte for each element.
The advantage of using a bit is that it takes less space.
The advantage of using a byte is that it is possible to have a pointer into the array.
Is it possible to take a pointer into an array of bits?

## Base Plus Offset

One possible implementation of a pointer into an array of sub-byte-sized elements
is to store a base pointer and an offset.
This works fine, but it require two words for the pointer.
Most arrays only require one word.

## Non-homogeneous Pointers

There is a different implementation that relies on pointers to booleans not
being valid pointers in the traditional sense.
The low three bits in the pointer are used as a kind of "sub-index",
and the other bits form a genuine pointer to a byte.
Dereference would be implemented as:

    // Not standards compliant C code, but illustrates idea
    // Within each byte, least significant bit corresponds to
    // lowest index.
    bool deref(uint64_t ptr) {
      uint8_t* base = (uint8_t*)(ptr >> 3);
      uint8_t e = *base;
      uint64_t ix = base & 0b111; // Does C allow binary literals?
      return (1 & (e >> ix));
    }

This gets the job done nicely.
An improvement for x86-64 would be to dedicate the low 8 bits,
rather than the low 3 bits,
to the sub-index.
The bits in positions 3-7 (inclusive) would always be zero.
This would let us get rid of the instruction corresponding to
the `0b111` masking in C by just referencing the sub-word-sized
register. Not sure if this trick would work on ARM or RISC-V.
