# Primitives for low-level IR

Things I need to be able to do:

* Increment pointers inside of loops
* Write to memory to build objects

We need three different ways to talk about arrays:

1. An array that is unpacked into an object.
2. Arrays that are not part of objects. These can be sliced in such a way that
   the runtime understands that it can reclaim part of the memory.
3. A slice of either of the first two kinds of array. This keeps its entire
   parent object (or parent array) live. This kind of reference may only
   exist on the stack. An object may not point to one of these.

In the presence of linearity, let bindings work a little differently. We cannot
freely inline them because this could duplicate a freeze operation.

We need a `withArray` operation that exposes a pointer and makes sure that the
entire region that it can reference stays live. We need a `toArray` operation
that turns the resulting pointer back into an array. The inteded use is:

    withArray myArr as myPtr:
      ... initialize all the elements
      myPtrX = myPtrY - len // move backwards to the beginning
      toArray myPtrX

We need something similar for arrays unpacked into objects. Assume that we
have a `Node` type with a `children` field that is a flexible array member.
We would write this:

    withField myNode, children as myPtr:
      ... initialize all the elements
      myPtrX = myPtrY - len // move backwards to the beginning
      toObject(Node,myPtr) // recover pointer to object

We get to use affine types instead of linear or uniqueness types. This is
nice. Also, this interface makes undefined behavior impossible. The `toObject`
primitive has an unusual type. The refinement looks like this:

    toObject
         (con : Con, ptr : Ptr a) | ptr.baseType = con
      -> (x : Boxed con)
