# Polymorphism over Integral-Type Width

Consider the `permute` function:

    permute : forall a.
         (v   : Array a)
      -> (ixs : Array (Int | $0 < len v))
      -> (r   : Array a) | len r = len ixs

The vector of indices should be able to accept indices of any bit width,
not just machine-word bit width. So, we could perhaps do something like
this:
     
    permute : forall (a : Type) (w : Width)
         (v   : Array a)
      -> (ixs : Array (Integer w | $0 < len v))
      -> (r   : Array a) | len r = len ixs

Each instantiation of `w` should create a different specialization. It may
also be useful to track signedness. That would be treated similarly.

I'm not sure if doing this is a good thing or not. An alternative is
to push the information about bitwidth into the `Array` type, but that comes
with its own problems. In particular, the bitwidth is only applicable to
numeric types.

Letting the user do this kind of bitwidth-based polymorphism has its
downsides. For example, a user could write the `take` function two different
ways:

    // Good
    take : (n : Int, xs : Array a) | n <= len xs
        -> (ys : Array a) | len ys = n
    // Bad
    take : (n : Integer w, xs : Array a) | n <= len xs
        -> (ys : Array a) | len ys = n

The second type of `take` is more general, but there is no point in doing
this. It would be better for the caller of `take` to just upcast their
numeric type to `Int` (the 64-bit integral type). The place to use `Integer w`
is as the argument of a type constructor. There, it has an impact on memory
layout.

How many other functions are there that can take advantage of bitwidth
polymorphism? Vectors and matrices seem like a good fit, but they are
not. The problem is that people need to be able to use those with floats
and doubles, so that would end up being handled by modules or typeclasses.
Anything that needs to add or multiply is in that same boat. I think that
it's really just indexing into arrays where this shows up. So maybe it's
not really a good idea to expose this kind of polymorphism to the end
user. After all, it's possible to implement `permute` with typeclasses
or modules. It's just a little less convenient.
