# Description of Sequitur Algorithm

The [Sequitur algorithm](http://www.sequitur.info) is a relatively simple
compression technique. Most descriptions of the algorithm are
bogged down by implementation details involving hash maps and linked lists.
I wanted to remove the implementation details and focus on the essence of
the algorithm. Here is the pseudocode description given in
figures 3.7 and 3.8 of
[Inferring Sequential Structure](http://www.sequitur.info/Nevill-Manning.pdf).
Where the original used italics, I use square brackets.

    # Figure 3.7
    LinkSymbols([left], [right])
      assign forward and back pointers in [left] and [right] to link the symbols
      look up digram <[left],[right]> in the digram hash table
      if the hash table entry is blank,
        assign it the location of this digram and record the table index within [left]
      otherwise,
        deal with the duplicate digram
      if [left] contains a hash table index for the digram it previously began,
        clear the hash table entry
    # Figure 3.8
    As each new input symbol is observed, append it to rule S.
    ===
    Each time a link is made between two symbols
      if the new digram is repeated elsewhere,
        if the other occurrence is a complete rule,
          replace the new digram with the non-terminal that heads the rule,
        otherwise,
          form a new rule and replace both digrams with the new non-terminal
      otherwise,
        insert the digram into the index
    ===
    Each time a digram is replaced by a non-terminal
      if either symbol is a non-terminal that only occurs once elsewhere,
        remove the rule, substituting its contents in place of the other non-terminal

Taken from the [Sequitur website](http://www.sequitur.info/jair), here are
the two properties that the grammar should have at all steps:

1. No pair of adjacent symbols appears more than once in the grammar (digram uniqueness)
2. Every rule is used more than once (rule utility)

Here is my translation of the algorithm:

    -- ID zero is reserved for the input sequence. It cannot be used in
    -- any other rules and does not need to satisfy the rule utility property
    type RuleId = Int
    type Token = Character Char | Rule RuleId
    type Digram = (Token,Token)
    -- Sequence must be non-empty
    type Sequence = Array Token
    -- A finger into the grammar, has a rule RHS that has been split
    -- and all the other rules.
    type Finger = (RuleId,Sequence,Sequence,Map RuleId Sequence)
    split : (Digram, Sequence) -> Option (Sequence,Sequence)
    countDigram : (Sequence, Digram) -> Option (Sequence,Sequence)
    -- Find a two-token rule with the exact two tokens in the digram.
    findDigramRule : (Map RuleId Sequence, Digram) -> Option RuleId
    locateMatch  : (Map RuleId Sequence, Digram) -> Option Finger
    -- Take all elements except for the last element
    init : Array a -> Array a
    empty : Array a
    snocInput(c : Char, rules : Map RuleId Sequence) -> Map RuleId Sequence:
      input = lookup(rules,0)
      rules' = replace(rules,0,input ++ Character(c))
      trailingDigram = (input[last],Character(c))
      enforceUniquenessOf(rules',trailingDigram)
    -- Call this right after inserting a new digram. This checks for an existing
    -- rule matching the digram and also looks for duplicates.
    enforceUniquenessOf(rules : Map RuleId Sequence, digram : Digram) -> Map RuleId Sequence:
      | Some ruleId <- findDigramRule(rules,digram):
          -- Note: there is actually only one occurence of the digram
          expandSingleUseRules(replaceAllDigramWithRule(rules,digram,ruleId),digram)
      | countDigram(rules,trailingDigram) > 1:
          -- Note: should not be possible for count to be greater than 2
          newRuleId = findUnusedId(rules)
          rules' = insert(rules,newRuleId,digram)
          expandSingleUseRules(replaceAllDigramWithRule(rules,digram,ruleId),digram)
      | otherwise: rules
    -- Precondition: the new rule has already been inserted
    -- I don't think this should recurse more than once.
    replaceAllDigramWithRule(rules : Map RuleId Sequence,digram : Digram,ruleId : RuleId) -> Map RuleId Sequence:
      | Some (modifiedRuleId,leftSeq,rightSeq,otherRules) <- locateMatch(rules,digram):
          rules' = replace(rules,modifiedRuleId,leftSeq ++ Rule(ruleId) ++ rightSeq)
          rules'' = if isEmpty(leftSeq):
            then: rules'
            else: enforceUniquenessOf(rules',(leftSeq[last],Rule(ruleId)))
          -- By the time that we check the digram formed with
          -- the right-hand side, that digram might not exist anymore.
          -- It could have already been merged in with the left-hand
          -- side, but that's ok.
          rules''' = if isEmpty(rightSeq):
            then: rules''
            else: enforceUniquenessOf(rules'',(Rule(ruleId),rightSeq[0]))
          replaceAllDigramWithRule(rules''',digram)
      | otherwise: rules
    expandSingleUseRules(rules : Map RuleId Sequence, digram : Digram) -> Map RuleId Sequence:
      expandSingleUseRule(expandSingleUseRule(rules,digram.first),digram.second)
    expandSingleUseRule(rules : Map RuleId Sequence, token : Token) -> Map RuleId Sequence:
      case token:
        Character _: rules
        Rule ruleId: if ruleHasSingleUse(rules,ruleId):
          then: expandRule(rules,ruleId)
          else: rules
    -- Precondition: there is a single use of the rule
    expandRule(rules : Map RuleId Sequence, ruleId : RuleId) -> Map RuleId Sequence:
      ruleDefinition = lookup(rules,ruleId)
      rules' = delete(rules,ruleId)
      | Some (modifiedRuleId,leftSeq,rightSeq,otherRules) <- locateRuleToken(rules,ruleId):
          rules' = replace(rules,modifiedRuleId,leftSeq ++ ruleDefinition ++ rightSeq)
          rules'' = if isEmpty(leftSeq):
            then: rules'
            else: enforceUniquenessOf(rules',(leftSeq[last],ruleDefinition[0]))
          -- See comment about similar path above. 
          rules''' = if isEmpty(rightSeq):
            then: rules''
            else: enforceUniquenessOf(rules'',(ruleDefinition[last],rightSeq[0]))
          rules'''
      | otherwise: throw exception

Darn. That's much less simple than I had hoped. One problem is that `expandRule` and
`replaceAllDigramWithRule` are very similar. 
