# One Traversal to Rule Them All, Conclusion

This is just the results of the entry from 2022-02-05 but cut down a bit
to remove the meandering. There are two objectives:

1. To have a single construct that captures as many possible patterns
   as possible for traversing, generating, and consuming arrays.
2. The construct should make it is easy for a compiler author to lower a
   traversal to SIMD instructions and easy for a programmer to predict
   that this will happen. This should only be expected to happen when
   it is reasonable. For example, any non-primitive function call inside
   the loop body means that vectorization does not happen. Use of state
   (an accumulator) also makes vectorization impossible. 

For some examples of array traversals, look at Haskell's
[vector](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/vector-0.12.3.1/docs/Data-Vector.html)
library:

* `generate :: Int -> (Int -> a) -> Vector a`
* `imap :: (Int -> a -> b) -> Vector a -> Vector b`
* `zipWith :: (a -> b -> c) -> Vector a -> Vector b -> Vector c`
* `mapMaybeM :: Monad m => (a -> m (Maybe b)) -> Vector a -> m (Vector b)`
* `all :: (a -> Bool) -> Vector a -> Bool`
* `minimum :: Ord a => Vector a -> a`
* `scanl :: (a -> b -> a) -> a -> Vector b -> Vector a`
  (example: `scanl (+) 0 <1,2,3,4> = <0,1,3,6,10>`)
* `uniq :: Eq a => Vector a -> Vector a`
* `reverse :: Vector a -> Vector a`

This list illustrates the diverse needs that users of arrays have, but it
is incomplete. There are many more functions in `Data.Vector`,
and it is not be possible to implement all of them with the construct proposed
in this post. However, it is possible to implement most of them. Here is
an example of the construct:

    for (len)(ix)(asc e1 <- src1,desc e2 <- src2)(acc1 = A,acc2 = B)(asc Int)(sum,product): 
      prologue => :
        x = ...
      body => :
        ((accA,accB),(r1),(out1,out2))
      epilogue(acc1,acc2)(dst1)(out1,out2) => :
        ...

The loop body has three parts:

1. Prologue: A set of let-bindings only executed when `len` is greater
   than zero. This is a form of laziness, and it matches the way that for loops
   are typically lowered with a `len` check at the very beginning.
2. Body: What to do on every iteration. This is expected to return a triple
   consisting of: new accumulators, output elements, output monoid values.
3. Epilogue: What to do after the loop is done. The programmer has access to
   a triple consisting of: final accumulator values, result arrays, result
   monoid values.

The loop takes six argument sets:

1. Length: How many times to iterate. Scalar. Not available inside loop.
2. Index: The current iteration. Always starts at zero. Scalar. Available in `body`.
3. Source arrays: Arrays to read from along with the iteration order. Vector.
   Available in `body`.
4. Accumulators: The state. Vector. Initial values must be supplied. These are
   available in `body`. The `body` must output new accumulators as the first
   tuple of the triple.
5. Output Vector Elements. Vector. These are not available in the
   body. The body must output these as the second tuple in the triple.
6. Output Monoids or Semigroups. A type equipped with a concatenation function.
   These are varied and are discussed more below.

Output monoids are the feature that makes vectorization predictable. Here are
some examples:

* Sum, Product: Always traverse the entire array.
* Min, Max: Traverse the entire array. These have a monoidal identity when the
  domain of integers is restricted. But otherwise, they don't.
* First, Last: Supports short-circuiting and vectorization.
* Any, All: Supports short-circuiting and vectorization. Similar to First/Last
  but without any need to track a particular elemnent. 

In particular, the ones without an identity (min,max,first,last) are tricky, and
I still need to think about them more. If you have at least one element in the
array, then the lack of an identity doesn't matter because you can process
the first element of the array to get the initial value. However, if you want
to be able to skip elements, then you'll need some kind of `None` element for
these.

What's really going on is that the ability to skip entries changes the types of
several things. For the output array, we get a weaker guarantee about the length.
Without skipping, we know that `output_len = len`, but with skipping, we only
know that `output_len <= len`. Similarly, we get a weird interaction with output
semigroups. Without skipping, `len > 0` implies that an output semigroup doesn't
need to be wrapped in an `Option` type. But with skipping, it does. The big
advantage we have with the output monoid is that we don't actually need any
special keyword for this. (Output elements need something special to say that
they are skipped.) That is, `First` and `FirstOptional` could be different
choices for the accumulator. `First` (and any other semigroup-but-not-monoid)
could only be used when the length is known to be greater than 0. Crucially,
just like for the accumulators, there would be no construct to skip a monoid
or semigroup output value. The restriction on length implies that the type
system has some way to enforce this. I am ok with that.

I need to write out some examples of this whole thing to illustrate it better.
