# Compiler Stages

After my latest bout of working on a compiler, I am writing down some of my
takeaways. The stages of the compiler are: STD (lambda-calculus without
lambda, augmented with let bindings and join points), ANF (A-Normal Form),
blocks (pseudo-asm unordered blocks), asm. I'll start with some brief notes
to myself about what to consider next, and then I'll get into specifics of
the existing system.

* Figure out if it is possible to get rid of annotations.
* Explore the possibility of making `Term` rely more on GADTs and less
  on type families.
* Parameterize `Term` on additional variables that indicate whether `foreach`
  is allowed and whether data constructor initializers are allowed.
* Investigate making case tests and alternatives more uniform in their
  representation.  

## Blocks

The blocks stage works very well. It is loosely inspired by hoopl (from GHC).
However, it is less focused on analysis and more focused on being a good
intermediate stage where the order of blocks has not yet been made clear.
Here is how it looks:

    data Openness = Open | Closed
    data Block :: (Type -> Openness -> Openness -> Type) -> Type -> Openness -> Openness -> Type where
      Lift :: node r s e -> Block node r s e
      Append :: Block node r s 'Open -> Block node r 'Open e -> Block node r s e
    data Node :: Type -> Openness -> Openness -> Type where
      Pass :: Node r 'Open 'Open -- does nothing
      Instr ::
           X86.Instruction r -- must be an instruction that does not jump
        -> Node r 'Open 'Open
      Entry :: Node r 'Closed 'Open
      Jump :: r -> Node r 'Open 'Closed -- an unconditional jump
      Return :: Node r 'Open 'Closed
      ConditionalJump :: Condition -> r -> r -> Node r 'Open 'Closed

Like hoopl, this track whether a block is open or closed on each end. It works
really well so far. I've not started using the stack or heap yet. I'm not sure
if those should be treated specially by `Node` or if those should be compiled
to instructions while turning something to a `Node`.

## Annotations

For both ANF and STD, I have every term and every atomic value tagged with
an annotation. These are bottom-up annotations. The two currently used are

* Shape: Narrows what values an expression might be. For example, an integer
  might be known to be positive. Or it might be known to be exactly 42.
* Usage: What variables from the context does an expression use and how
  many times does it use them. While optimizing, this is useful for inlining
  and for dead code elimination. While lowering to instructions, this is useful
  for finding free registers.

This is very powerful, and I believe it the only reasonable way to perform certain
kinds of analysis. However, I do not like having to annotate like this.
We end up with:

    data Annotated a v = Annotated {anno :: a, value :: v}
    data Term a
      = CaseBool Atom (Annotated a (Term a v)) (Annotated a (Term a v))
      | ...

When the annotation is unit (no annotation), we end up having to dig through
the useless `Annotated` layer to get to each child expression. I should
think about this more. Maybe there is another way.

## Generic Expression Transforms

I love these. This has been very successful. What this looks like in my
current project is:

    data Transform (e :: Type) (s :: Stage) (a :: Type) (b :: Type) = Transform
      { term ::
             SStage s
          -> e
          -> Map (Annotated b (Rhs b s))
          -> a
          -> Term b s
          -> Annotated b (Term b s)
      , atom ::
             SStage s
          -> e
          -> Map (Annotated b (Rhs b s))
          -> a
          -> Atom
          -> Annotated b Atom
      , application ::
             SStage s
          -> e
          -> Map (Annotated b (Rhs b s))
          -> a
          -> Application (Annotated b (Arg b s))
          -> Annotated b (Application (Annotated b (Arg b s)))
      }

This looks awful, but all that's going on is that, as an implementer of a
transformation, you specify how you want terms, atoms, and applications
(like primops) to be modified. You don't write out a recursive function.
Recursion over an expression is written out in a single place, and then
you can plug in a transform. The transforms run bottom up. A lot of program
transformations and annotations can be implemented this way:

* Shape (annotation)
* Usage (annotation)
* Constant folding
* Inlining
* Dead code elimination

There might be useful transformations that cannot be done this way, but
I'm not sure yet. In particular, I don't think that lowering from STD to
ANF can be done with something like this, but I don't know for sure.

## ANF

The ANF that I use has these constraints:

* Let bindings may only have simple things (like primops or function calls)
  on the RHS. The RHS cannot have a let binding, a case statement, or a
  join point.
* Case statements may only occur in tail position.
* It is fine to declare a join points inside of another join point.

If you think of an expression AST as a tree, ANF is a form that degrades
this tree to something with greater height. Specifically, the RHS of a
let binding can no longer be a deep tree. It is restricted to simple
functions operating on atomic values.

## STD and ANF

This is where I got something wrong. I had assumed that, when lowering from
STD to ANF, it would be a good time to compile these away:

* Foreach expressions
* Data constructor field assignment

As I've worked on this, I've realized that both of these can be done an
as STD-to-STD pass. It is actually more simple to do this way since it
keeps the amount of work done in each pass to a minimum.

Also, there's a common x86 optimization that let's you perform an
highly restricted arithmetic like `b + 2*a + 5` as a single instruction (`LEA`).
Where is the best place to look for this? I had originally thought that
it should be done as either ANF-to-ANF or when lowering ANF to blocks.
However, the easiest place to do this is STD-to-STD. There, it's trivial
since we can just look to see if an expression looks the right way.

## Integer Overflow

A problem that continues to gnaw at my mind is what to do about integer
overflow. Integer overflow is bad, and I think the right thing to do is
to kill the problem if this happens. The only way to remove the check
for it should be to prove (with a real proof) that overflow is not possible.
This is a huge pain for the user though.
