# Monomorphization, Stenciling, Pointers

## Background

Monomorphization instantiates a polymorphic function, producing a copy
for each set of type arguments that the polymorphic function is applied
to. This is usually good. Consider an ordered map implemented with arrays
at the leaves in which the values are

* 64-bit words
* 8-bit words
* a boxed `Person` type (a pointer)

Having a different copy of `insert` for each of the types is desirable.
The wrench that always gets thrown in is more boxed types:

* a boxed `House` type (a pointer)
* a boxed `Dog` type (a pointer)
* a boxed `Widget` type (a pointer)

Do we want a separate copy of `insert` for each of these? Probably not.
They have nearly the same implementation. (A tracing collector needs to
have some way to treat each element differently though.) Different compilers
approach this problem differently. MLton trudges away producing a bunch of
identical copies of the function. Golang uses something called
"GC Shape Stenciling", which results in a single implementation for
all boxed types.

## Novel Approach

Consider a mostly monomorphized setting in which types look like this:

    data Width = W8 | W16 | W32 | W64
    data Type
      = Word Width
      | Bool
      | Boxed Box
      | Pointer Type
    data Box
      = BoxVar LocalId
      | BoxConcrete GlobalId [Box] -- boxed type arguments
      | BoxArray Type -- array element type 

Now, `insert` can be instantiated as:

    insertW8  : Word64 -> Word8 -> MapW8 -> MapW8
    insertW64 : Word64 -> Word64 -> MapW64 -> MapW64
    insertBox : forall (a : Box) -> Word64 -> a -> MapBox[a] -> MapBox[a]

So, it's not fully monomorphic, but the only allowed type variables are
for boxed types. There are no width variables. Also, data types have to
be given different names for each of their monomorphizations. Array, the
type of immutable arrays supporting slicing, has been lumped in with boxed
types since it should be possible for the GC to treat it like other boxed
types.

Use of the `Pointer` type is heavily restricted, and it is not on equal footing
with the others. For example, it cannot be used as a field in a data type.
Let's look at another possible instantiation:

    permuteW8Box : forall (a : Box) -> Pointer Immutable Word8 -> Pointer Mutable a -> Pointer Mutable a
    permuteW16W64 : Pointer Immutable Word16 -> Pointer Mutable Word64 -> Pointer Mutable Word64

All boxed types (including arrays) and pointers can be mutable or immutable.
If mutable, they must be used linearly.

