# More Compilation IRs

I've been thinking about more IRs that can exist in a compilation pipeline.
Here's what I've got so far.

## Basic Blocks with Acyclic Let Graphs

What's the next step after ANF? One minimal option is to compile to basic
blocks but preserve acyclic let graphs. Essentially, this means erasing
the distinction between join points and case statements. It also causes
variable scope to be widened. Every basic block has access to all
bound variables declared in any dominating node. So, for a join point,
this could cause it to see let-bound variables that were declared
after the join point was declared. But it would only see them if
they were on every path.

Why introduce this stage? The purpose of this stage is to answer the
question of how let bindings should be ordered. We want the earliest
executions to be those that reduce the set of live bindings. For
example, `z = x + y` when `x` and `y` both have no further uses.

One other good use of this stage is to look for opportunities to
rewrite certain combinations of let bindings into fused instructions
like `LEA`. This need to be done *before* committing to an ordering.
Some of these instructions have important restrictions on the arguments.
For example, when using `LEA` instruction to compute `a*x + b`, `a`
and `b` must be registers (roughly bound variables) and `x` must be
one of the literals 1, 2, 4, or 8. Another example is the `VPERM`
instructions, although AVX-512 makes these more flexible.
So, in addition to our high-level functions
and primitives that take both variables and literals, we want
to sprinkle in some weird primitives that lock down some of their
arguments.

## High Level X86-64

Generating good X86-64 instruction sequneces can be difficult.
Here are some challenges for a code generator:

1. Most instructions that support 32-bit immidiates do not support
   64-bit immidiates.
2. There are no vector-register immidiates.
3. The prevalence of two-operand instructions means that sometimes you want
   a different instruction sequence if the lowered operation is an argument
   register's final use.
4. Flags can be tricky. There are two ways to zero a register:
   `MOV r15d, 0` and `XOR r15d, r15d`. The former leaves flags
   unaffected but the latter sets them all. Typically you want the `XOR`-based
   zeroing, but sometimes you need to preserve flags.

These challenges make it difficult to lower from a high-level IR to
good x86-64 instructions in a single pass. An x86-64 IR that helps
solve these problems should have these properties:

* Single-entry, single-exit basic blocks
* Unlimited number of virtual registers
* Generalized instructions that support large immidiates. (Helps with 1 and 2.)
  When the immidiate argument is small, these are lowered to the x86-64
  instruction that accepts an immidiate argument. When the immidiate is
  large, these are lowered by using `MOV` to load the immidiate into a
  register and then using the register-argument variant of the instruction.
  If the instruction occurs in a loop, the `MOV` should be floated outward
  as long as register pressure is not too great.
* Instructions that distinguish result from arguments. (Helps with 3.)
  These are lowered differently depending on whether, during register selection,
  an argument and result are assigned to the same register.
* Instructions that communicate expected impact on flags: assigning, preserving,
  undefined. (Helps with 4.)

## What's the Difference

What is the difference between these two IRs? The main difference is the
strong ordering of instructions. Without a strong ordering, we cannot do
anything with the flags register.

## Materializing the Stack

When calling functions, we typically need to spill registers to the stack.
At some point, we must make this explicit. Then, after making it explicit,
we have an opportunity to sink the loads that come after the function call.
It is important to sink them because we might get to push them into a
different basic block, and it might be one that the flow of control doesn't
often end up reaching.

When we materialize the stack, registers can still be virtual. Later, when
we assign virtual registers to physical registers, we might have to do
additional stack stuff.
