# Refinements to Array Traversal Scheme

## Move Identifiers

Continuing the idea from 2022-02-08, it's probably good to move the identifiers
down into the loop body. For example:

    for (len)(asc src1,desc src2)(A,B)(asc Int)(sum,product): 
      prologue => :
        x = ...
      body(ix)(e1,e2)(acc1,acc2) => :
        continue(accA,accB)(r1)(out1,out2)
      epilogue(acc1,acc2)(dst1)(out1,out2) => :
        ...

This makes it more clear where those names are available. Individual array
elements are not available in the prologue or the epilogue.

## Non-Empty Variant

The other addition I thought about was a variant where the length is known
to be greater than 0. In this situation, the prologue is unneeded, and
the user is allowed to use semigroup output (rather than just monoid).

    for1 (len)(asc src)()()(min,max): 
      body(ix)(val)() => :
        continue()()(val,val)
      epilogue()()(lo,hi) => :
        ... do something with lo and hi

This is small but I think it's important. Non-empty arrays come up a lot
in programming, and you don't want to be stuck with a `Maybe` or `Option`
when you know that you've actually got a value.

## Special Treatment of First Element (of dubious value)

One last bit. Here's an example implementation of `uniq`:

    finish(result):
      ... do something with result
    case {cmp} on (len, 0) of:
      EQ => jump finish(emptyArray)
      GT => :
        val0 = src[0]
        for1 (len)(asc src)(val0)(asc Int starting [val0])(): 
          body(ix)(val)(prev) => :
            case {Bool} on (val == prev) of:
              True => continue(skip)(val)()
              False => continue(val)(val)()
          epilogue(_)(result)() => :
            jump finish(result)

This works, but it's unfortunate that we needed to roll our own length
check instead of letting the prologue do its thing. Let's try a more
powerful prologue:

    for (len)(asc src)(_)(asc Int)(): 
      empty => :
        jump finish(emptyArray)
      body0(val) => :
        continue(val)(val)()
      body(ix)(val)(prev) => :
        case {Bool} on (val == prev) of:
          True => continue(skip)(val)()
          False => continue(val)(val)()
      epilogue(_)(result)() => :
        jump finish(result)

The idea is that, on entering the loop, you go to either `empty` or `body0`.
With this, `body0` can operate on the first element and produce an initial
accumulator. But, now we're missing `prologue`'s original feature and can
no longer bind identifiers that become accessible through the rest of the
loop.

It's possible that `uniq` is just a case worth solving something less elegant
or with a primop. I need to think more about how important this case is.

Looking through `Data.Vector`, I get the sense that `uniq` is a somewhat
uncommon operation. In particular, it combines that non-empty invariant
of `foldl1` with array production. However, there are other functions from
`Data.Vector` that work this way. Consider `scanl1`, documented as:

    scanl1 f <x1,...,xn> = <y1,...,yn>
      where y1 = x1
            yi = f y(i-1) xi

The first element in the output is determined differently from the others. Like
`uniq`, this is a situation where the initial accumulator is produced by the
first element, not consumed by it. However, `scanl1` is itself a little
strange. The main use for it that I have found online is implementing prefix
sums, but for this, plain old `scanl` is sufficient. I found another example
where someone used `scanl1 min`, which would provide the lowest value that
occurred before or at each position. That's a little more compelling.

Overall, it seems like this particular case is somewhat rare. I think I
would be alright with requiring users to write clumsy code that would not
be optimized well. For `uniq`, I think a primop would suffice. But if
it wasn't a primop, here's the clumsy implementation that the user would
need to write:

    for (len)(asc src)(unusedInitVal)(asc Int)(): 
      body(ix)(val)(prev) => :
        case {cmp} on (ix, 0):
          EQ => continue(val)(val)
          NE => case {Bool} on (val == prev) of:
            True => continue(skip)(val)()
            False => continue(val)(val)()
      epilogue(_)(result)() => ...

It's not good because you have to pull an unused value out of thin air,
and it repeatedly checks the index even though it's only ever zero on
the first iteration. But, it does work. To avoid having to pull a value
out of thin air, you could first check the length of the array.

## Multi-Element Output (of dubious value)

This is just an extension of the ability to skip output elements. Instead of
just zero or one ouputs at each iteration, we could open things up and
allow any number of outputs at each step. There are two flavors of this:

* Require statically bounded output sizes
* Allow output sizes without known bounds

The first one is much easier to implement. If we go this route, it's easy
to establish an upper bound on the size of the output array. The other
option requires outputting to chunks and then concatenating them at
the end.

I'm not really sure how useful either of these actually are, but the first
option (statically bounded size) is a very natural extension of the `skip`
mechanism. In theory, the unknown-bounds option makes it possible to
implement something like `concatMap`, but the performance would be no
better than just building the intermediate data structure and then
flattening it out in the end (the flattening would be done by a primop).
