# User-Defined and Built-In Types

Here's a way to represent types:

    data Type = Type (Con arity) (Vec arity Type)
    data Con arity
      = BuiltIn (BuiltInCon arity)
      | UserDefined (UserDefinedCon arity)
    data BuiltInCon arity where
      Int :: BuiltInCon 0
      Bool :: BuiltInCon 0
      Array :: BuiltInCon 1
    data UserDefinedCon arity = UserDefinedCon Id (SNat arity)

For user-defined types (all of which are boxed), we operate in a realm
of uncertainty. Is the arity correct? It's possible to pull a `UserDefinedCon`
out of thin air, so what guarantees do we have?

Modules provide a solution to this problem. We can hide the representation
of `UserDefinedCon` in certain contexts and make it only accessible through
an API. In some settings, it makes sense to go further and hide the distinction
between user-defined types and built-in types. An example signature for this:

    sig NoVisibility where
      data Type = Type (Con arity) (Vec arity Type)
      data Con arity
      getConArity : Con arity -> SNat arity
    sig LittleVisibility where
      data Type = Type (Con arity) (Vec arity Type)
      data Con arity
        = BuiltIn (BuiltInCon arity)
        | UserDefined (UserDefinedCon arity)
      data UserDefinedCon arity
      getUserDefinedConArity : UserDefinedCon arity -> SNat arity

We can pack even more information into `UserDefinedCon`. This is probably a
good idea since it is nice to have information about datatype fields
available during typechecking. The fields can refer to type arguments,
which makes things tricky. Whenever we apply a user-defined type constructor
to an argument, we would like to build a cache of the fields. Where
should this cache go? The only place that makes sense is inside of `Type`,
but this means that we would need to make `Type` opaque to avoid unsafe
constructions. Maybe that's fine though.

Oh, there's also the problem with recursive types that I had forgotten about.
Tying the knot is awful, and programs hang when you try to print out a cyclic
data structure, and tying the knot can't even be done in any language other
than Haskell. Maybe there's some trick to work about this like `Generic1`
in GHC. I cannot remember.
