# Literature on Mixins

Mixins are a language feature for [modular programming](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Modular_programming).
Two popular alternatives in the function-programming world are
typeclasses (Haskell) and modules (SML). Here are references
to several papers that deal with mixins or modules:

* [Mixin' Up the ML Module System](https://people.mpi-sws.org/~rossberg/mixml/mixml-toplas.pdf),
  Andreas Rossberg and Derek Dreyer. This is the basis for
  [MixML](https://people.mpi-sws.org/~rossberg/mixml/), an SML-inspired
  language with several commonly requested extensions. Section 1.2 includes
  a useful description of a module merge operator merging `M1` and `M2`:

  > 1. exports(M) = exports(M1) ∪ exports(M2)
  > 2. imports(M) = imports(M1) ∪ imports(M2) − exports(M)

* [Mixin Modules](https://www.cs.tufts.edu/~nr/cs257/archive/dominic-duggan/Mixin%20Modules.pdf),
  Dominic Duggan and Constantinos Sourelis. This older paper suggests
  mixins as an SML extension solely to provide recursive modules. Compared
  to other presentations of mixins, these are somewhat restricted.
* [Backpack: Retrofitting Haskell with Interfaces](https://plv.mpi-sws.org/backpack/backpack-paper.pdf),
  Kilpatrick, Dreyer, Peyton Jones, Marlow. Also known as Backpack '14.
  Much more that the SML-oriented papers, this provides easy-to-understand
  examples of how mixins are applied and composed. Section 2.1 includes a
  wonderful illustration of how to implement mutually recursive modules with
  a system like this.
* [Backpack to Work: Towards Practical Mixin Linking for Haskell](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/backpack-2016.pdf),
  Yang, Kilpatrick, Dreyer, Peyton Jones. Also known as Backpack '16.
  This drops several Backpack '14 features (like recursive modules)
  to make it possible to implement Backpack in GHC and Cabal. This
  paper has some nice diagrams. There is an interesting claim at the
  end of the paper:
  
  > As this paper does not address mutual recursion, one may wonder
  > if the mixed component language is not simply just a stylized
  > applicative functor language. In fact, it is! The reason our technical
  > presentation is done in the way it is done here is because our primary
  > goal was integrating with the existing compiler infrastructure.
  
  The "stylized" language avoids SML's "preponderance of sharing constraints",
  so it might be ergonomically better in certain scenarios. 
* [Really Small Backpack Example](https://github.com/danidiaz/really-small-backpack-example),
  Daniel Diaz. A GitHub repository that shows you how to use Backpack.
  This is important because the documentation for Backpack is not
  good.
* [Applicative functors and fully transparent higher-order modules](https://caml.inria.fr/pub/papers/xleroy-applicative_functors-popl95.pdf),
  Xavier Leroy. This is about non-generative module functors for SML and
  about higher-order functors.

# Example of Preponderance of Sharing Constraints

Mixins are cool, and they are similar to SML modules. The Backpack '16 paper
complains of SML's "preponderance of sharing constraints". I haven't seen
an example of this written out plainly, so I'll illustrate what this means
with a contrived example. In Haskell, one might write:

    // Uses the array interface from Data.Array.IArray
    encodeMax : (IArray arr a, ToJson a, Ord a) => arr a -> Json

With SML, you compose these like this:

    // Signature ARRAY has these types: arr, t.
    // Signature ORD has these types: t.
    // Signature TOJSON has these types: t.
    functor EncodeMax (structure array : ARRAY
                       structure ord : ORD where type t = array.t
                       structure toJson : TOJSON where type t = ord.t) = struct
      encodeMax : array.arr -> Json
    end

Notice that we have to explicitly write type equalities. With Haskell's
typeclasses, we were able to communicate the same thing more tersely just by
giving these the same name. Now, let's look one way that mixins could work:

    signature Array { type Array; type T; ... }
    signature Ord { type T; ... }
    signature ToJson { type T; ... }
    module EncodeMax (Array ∪ Ord ∪ ToJson) where
      encodeMax : Array -> Json

This is very much like the SML approach except that the compiler merges
signatures for us. It's more terse than backpack in this example, but
it's also less powerful. This simplified mixin system doesn't allow signatures
to depend on other signatures, a serious limitation. The way that backpack
actually works, we have another level of namespacing, packages:

    package array
      signature X { type Array; type T; ... }
    package ord
      signature X { type T; ... }
    package toJson
      signature X { type T; ... }
    // The package encode-max is indefinite. It must be instantiated by
    // supplying a package that provides a module X that has all types
    // and functions implied by the merge of array.X, ord.X, and toJson.X.  
    package encode-max
      include array
      include ord
      include toJson
      module EncodeMax
        import X (Array, T)
        encodeMax : Array -> Json

This scheme makes it is possible for a package to expose two signatures,
and one of these may import the other. This extra power is not used in
this example, but it is helpful in other situations.

*Reminder*: Keep in mind that this is an exposition of one particular
pattern that comes are when programming modularly. There are other scenarios
where the legibility tables are turned around. I feel obligated to include
this notice so that someone doesn't conclude "SML modules are bad because..."
from this journal entry. For example, contrasting with mixins, what if
we had wanted the ordering and json serialization to be available not for
the element for the element? SML makes this trivial. Just switch the type
sharing constraint. But with mixins, we aren't so lucky. The types in our
signatures line up anymore.

# Impressions

I find this daunting. There are a lot of ways to go about this kind
of thing. There are differences in expressive power that I don't understand
well. There are also differences in ergonomics.
In [December 2006 on the MLton mailing list](http://mlton.org/pipermail/mlton/2006-December/029469.html),
Vesa Karvonen argued for mixins on the grounds that so many signatures in
SML's extended basis library fit the one-type-many-functions pattern.
This is the very pattern that typeclasses work out so nicely for.

I find that the introduction of packages, makes the backpack that is a
part of GHC is also rather cumbersome. I wonder if there is a way to
get by with the lighter variant suggested in the previous section. Or
maybe the hierarchy could be flattened out more. Maybe modules and
packages could be the same thing. Perhaps MixML does this.

One frustration with GHC's implementation of backpack is how heavily
it pushes inference on the user. In the usual Haskell source language,
you can write top-level functions without type signatures, but you have
the option to provide the type signature as well. And then the compiler
checks that the inferred type is compatible with the type signature.
Most people provide type signatures for all top-level terms and functions
because it aids comprehension. Backpack doesn't give
you the option to say "this is the signature I expect here". It just
merges all the signatures with the same names. The user must fashion
himself or herself into a typing algorithm and deduce the signature. Not
just any algorithm, an algorithm that resists specification.
[Section 7.2 of Backpack '16](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/backpack-2016.pdf)
explains:

> In our tour of Backpack, we stated that requirements from multiple
> components automatically merge together when they are brought
> into scope. Indeed, we have implemented this; unfortunately, it is
> unclear how to formally specify this process without substantially
> complicating the typechecking rules, which is why our typechecking
> semantics currently nondeterministically guess the "correct" requirement type.

That's not a good user experience.

# Naming Conventions

It [has been argued](https://www.reddit.com/r/haskell/comments/8a5w1n/comment/dwy3bcj/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=web2x&context=3)
that an advantage of modules over typeclasses is that the user of the
indefinite module or the module functor gets to pick out any implementation
and that the author of it can avoid unwanted dependencies. This is true,
but I think that there is still a kind of coordination that is required
for the user's experience to be pleasant. One might even describe such
coordination as antimodular. Implementations need to use the same names
to refer to types and functions that having the same behavior. Otherwise,
the user of the module functor is left playing clean-up, renaming
everything to plug the holes.
