# Register Allocation on a Term

Most literature on register allocation uses single-entry single-exit basic
blocks as the starting point. I've been wondering whether or not it is
possible to reuse the Term type for register allocation. This requires
several concessions:

1. Strong ordering of assignments (no "let soup"). We need a "sequenced let"
   construct. The name "bind" might be appropriate.
2. Explicit spill and reload operations. 
3. A type system that can make resources unavailable. This could be done
   with linear/affine types or just by having a sequenced operation that
   removes bound identifiers from the context. 
   This operation is commonly known as "delete" or "destroy", but we want
   this to happen whenever we spill a register to the stack.

How might this look? Consider a function that looks like this:

    scramble(x : Int, y : Int) returns (Int):
      a = x + y
      b = x * y
      c = a + b
      d = x + c
      e = y + d
      e

## Naive Lowering

Assume that we have committed to this sequence of instructions (even though
there are other ways to accomplish the same thing that create less register
pressure). Also, assume that arguments are passed in on the stack and that
the return value is in a register and that there are 3 available registers.
Here is the naive lowering the reloads constantly. At the beginning, type
annotations are provided to help distinguish bound identifiers that live
on the stack from bound identifiers that live on the heap. 

    scramble(x : Int@Stack, y : Int@Stack) returns (Int):
      01. x_0 : Int@Reg = load(x)
      02. y_0 : Int@Reg = load(y)
      03. a_0 : Int@Reg = x0 + y0
      04. delete x_0
      05. delete y_0
      06. a : Int@Stack = store(a_0)
      07. delete a_0
      10. x_1 = load(x)
      11. y_1 = load(y)
      12. b_0 = x * y
      13. delete x_1
      14. delete y_1
      15. b = store(b_0)
      16. delete b_0
      17. a_1 : Int@Reg = load(a)
      20. b_1 : Int@Reg = load(b)
      21. c_0 = a_1 + b_1
      22. delete a_1
      23. delete b_1
      24. c = store(c_0)
      25. delete c_0
      26. x_2 : Int@Reg = load(x)
      27. c_1 : Int@Reg = load(c)
      30. d_0 = x_2 + c_1
      31. delete x_2
      32. delete c_1
      33. d = store(d_0)
      34. delete d_0
      35. y_2 : Int@Reg = load(y)
      36. d_1 : Int@Reg = load(d)
      37. e_0 = y_2 + d_1
      40. delete y_2
      41. delete d_1
      42. e_0

This is not a register allocation. However, register allocation is now possible
with a simple top-down pass. Let's look at the first several instructions:

    scramble(x : Int@Stack, y : Int@Stack) returns (Int):
      01. x_0 : Int@Reg = load(x)     | R0: x_0, R1: ?,   R2: ?
      02. y_0 : Int@Reg = load(y)     | R0: x_0, R1: y_0, R2: ?
      03. a_0 : Int@Reg = x0 + y0     | R0: x_0, R1: y_0, R2: a_0
      04. delete x_0                  | R0: ?,   R1: y_0, R2: a_0
      05. delete y_0                  | R0: ?,   R1: ?,   R2: a_0
      06. a : Int@Stack = store(a_0)  | R0: ?,   R1: ?,   R2: a_0
      07. delete a_0                  | R0: ?,   R1: ?,   R2: ?
      10. x_1 = load(x)               | R0: x_1, R1: ?,   R2: ?
      11. y_1 = load(y)               | R0: x_1, R1: y_1, R2: ?
      12. b_0 = x * y                 | R0: x_1, R1: y_1, R2: b_0

Even with something as naive as this, it is possible to layer some
cheap optimizations on top before performing register allocation. For example,
in lines 04 and 05, we evict `x` and `y` from registers. But in lines
10 and 11, we load them back in. Crucially, there are no loads between these.
Considering just `x`, both lines 04 and 10 could be removed, and all occurrences
of `x_1` could be replaced with `x_0`.

## Sophisticated Lowering

When more than 3 registers are available, the naive lowering leaves registers
unused, which is wasteful. How do we pick a better lowering? A strange
property of the system described here is that spilling is handled *before*
register assignment. There is no certainty that it will be possible to
assign registers to any given lowering. We could try something like this:

1. Start with naive lowering (guaranteed to work)
2. Assignability-preserving optimizations
3. Eliminate finite-distance spill-then-reload sequences. Distance is
   measured by the number of variables access between the spill and
   the reload. Start with shortest distances and keep going higher.
4. Eliminate infinite-distance spill-then-reload sequences. These
   are caused by recursive join points.

This performs a ton of redundant work, but I think that it would work
just fine.
