# Proofs and Polymorphism

Consider the function for replacing an element in a persistent array:

    write : Array a -> Int -> a -> Array a

In a representation-monomorphized language, one such specialization of this is:

    write : Array W8 -> W8 -> Bool -> Array W8

How do we make it so that this monomorphized version can carry about proofs
about the `W8`s inside of the array? How about:

    replicate :
            (p : ∀(w : W8) -> Predicate)
         -> Array (∃(w : W8). (w, p w))
         -> (∃(w : W8). (w, p w))
         -> Array (∃(w : W8). (w, p w))

More cleanly, with sigma, we may write:

    replicate :
            (p : W8 -> Predicate)
         -> Array (Σ W8 p)
         -> Σ W8 p
         -> Array (Σ W8 p)

And we can write an indexing function as:

    index : (p : W8 -> Predicate)
         -> (a : Array (Σ W8 p))
         -> (i : Int)
         -> (0 <= i)
         -> (i <= length a - 1)
         -> Σ W8 p

There are a few wrinkles. One of these is that the predicate language does not
need to distinguish between numbers of varying bit widths like the value/type
language does. I'm not sure how exactly to resolve that. Another issue is that,
with this system, any use of polymorphism forces the user to do all this stuff
with sigma. The representation-polymorphic type of `index` is:

    index : {R : Rep}
         -> (p : R -> Predicate)
         -> (a : Array (Σ R p))
         -> (i : Int)
         -> (0 <= i)
         -> (i <= length a - 1)
         -> Σ R p

All type constructors should have a sigma built into them since that is really
the only way to use them. Anything polymorphic should work this way. Here is
an example of using this with no predicate:

    let x = index W8 [] arr 5 const _

Here is an example with a predicate:

    let x = index W8 [@a <= 100, 0 <= @a] arr 5 const _
