# Rep Arguments and Type Arguments

Polymorphic functions should be specialized. For example, using GHC's syntax
for this kind of thing, consider:

    lookup :: forall_rep v. Key -> Map v -> Maybe v
    lookup @Person
    lookup @Word8

We need a specialization of `lookup` for each of these. However, we do not
want a specialization for each boxed type. Consider:

    lookup @Person
    lookup @House

These functions should be the exact same thing. So, what we really want is
something like this:

    lookup @Boxed ==> forall_box b. Key -> Map (Box b) -> Maybe (Box b)
    lookup @Word8 ==> Key -> Map Word8 -> Maybe Word8 

Instantiating a rep variable with `Boxed` results in a function that takes
a type varibable (corresponding to a boxed type). Instantiating a rep variable
with `Word8` or `Word16` results in a function that does not take any type
arguments. There are other flavors of this. For example, a builtin type for
arrays that support slices would something like:

    lookup @(Array r) ==> forall_rep b. Key -> Map (Array b) -> Maybe (Array b)

Hmm... that's no good. There should be a single implementation of this for
all array types, but this suggests that there are many copies of the
implementation.

# Without Rep Arguments

I think there is a better way to do this. Let's just have plain old type
arguments instead:

    lookup :: forall v. Key -> Map v -> Maybe v
    lookup @Person
    lookup @House
    lookup @Word8
    lookup @(Array Word8)
    lookup @(Array Word16)

At compile time, the compiler can figure out all instantiations of `lookup`'s
type argument. It can then use properties of `lookup`'s implementation
(non-allocating, uses array of `v` internally) to figure out which
instantiations share a specialization. The above example would end up
grouped like this:

1. Person, House
2. Word8
3. Array Word8, Array Word16

But for different functions, these might end up grouped differently.
For example, when not used inside of an array, `Word8` and boxed typed
can be treated the same.
