# Read, Write, Index

GHC distinguishes between reads from mutable arrays and reads from immutable
arrays. It uses the term *read* for the former and *index* for the latter.
Mutable arrays and immutable arrays are completely different types. One
occassional code-sharing problem that I've noticed is that some effectful
functions (result type involving `IO`) read from a buffer and copy it
somewhere. Technically, these functions should be able to accept either
an immutable array or an immutable array. Either would be safe since
the effectful function sequences reads. To accomplish this, we can unsafely
coerce an immutable array to a mutable one. This works as long as we
don't call any of the *write* functions on it.

Another tangentially related feature is the ability to have a reference
that cannot be read from or written to. This is the spirit of the sentinel
pointer produced by strength reduction to eliminate an index variable.

Let's explore a solution that applies refinements a pointer type:

                    +-- index
    none -- read -- +
                    +-- write

This is a partial ordering where *none* is the least element. A pointer
can always be converted to a pointer with fewer permissions. We can
express this as a subtyping relationship:

    (p : Ptr | p.permission = index) :< (p : Ptr | p.permission = read) 
    (p : Ptr | p.permission = write) :< (p : Ptr | p.permission = read) 

Equipped with this, we can write a wrapper for `send` or `write` (syscalls)
that accepts a *read* pointer, and it will accept both *index* and *write*
pointers.

## Linearity Wrinkle

One question about this approach is what happens in a system that expects
mutable pointers to be consumed linearly. If *write* and *read* imply
linear use, then this should still work. We can still convert an
*index* pointer to a *read* pointer because linearity only cares
about consumption, not uniqueness. Consequently, conversions from
unrestricted to linear are safe. However, the conversion from *read*
to *none* is now a problem. We can fix this by creating a special
helper function that allows the user to borrow a *none* pointer.
Unlike rust, we do not need to worry about the borrowed reference
outliving the parent because you cannot do anything with it other
than compare it with other pointers to the same array. Here is an
example of how this would be used:

    let (ptr1,sentinelTmp) = borrow(ptr0)
    let sentinel = advance(sentinelTmp,100)
    ... now do the actual loop


## Subtyping Wrinkle

Immutable pointers are covariant and mutable pointers are invariant.
I think this works out fine as long as we treat *none* pointers as
invariant. When you convert from *index* to *read*, you lose covariance.

Since variance depends on the permission level, the permission must
be something other than a refinement. It needs to be an integral part of
the type itself. We want to have:

    Ptr Index Int
    Ptr Read Int
    Ptr None Int
    Ptr Write Int

Instead of the permission-based pointer subtyping being handled implicity,
it needs to be handle explicity. That is, the user must convert a
`Ptr Index Int` to a `Ptr Read Int`. However, the compiler should
implicitly handle this subtyping relationship:

    Ptr Index (Int | ? < 5) :< Ptr Index (Int | ? < 8)
