# Handling Compressed Arrays with SMT

SMT solvers cannot combine bitvec and linear arithmetic. Not well at least.
Operations like `popcnt` splinter into a huge number of possibilities and
cause the solver to hang. This matter because of compessed arrays of optional
elements use bit vectors with an invariant that the population count must
match the length of an array. Here's an example:

    TrieNode
      key : Key
      mask : Bits64
      children : Array (TrieNode | popcnt($0.mask) = length($0.children))

All `TrieNode`s must obey this invariant. When we union two nodes, we need
an operation like this:

    union :
         (maskA : Bits64, maskB : Bits64, elemsA : Array e, elemsB : Array e) |
           (popcnt maskA = len elemsA, popcnt maskB = len elemsB)
      -> (elemsC : Array e, maskC : Bits64) |
           (popcnt maskC = len elemsB, maskC = or maskA maskB)

We don't really need to know that the new mask is just the old two masks
ORed together, and similarly, it doesn't actually matter that then result
array must have a length that is greater than or equal to the lengths of
either argument array. The are facts, but it may be hard to prove them
with an SMT solver, and the user is likely not able to exploit them.

The problem with `popcnt` is that the way that it must be defined when
using it in an SMT solver is:

    popcnt(x) = x[0] + x[1] + x[2] + ...

This leads to terrible performance. Solvers hang when trying to prove even
simple propositions involving these. However, if we know that we are going
to be doing induction on a bit vector, maybe we could just define it
differently:

    -- Bits that are constructed by filling in the greatest index first.
    -- We are treating these like a set of integers. In this interpretation,
    -- popcnt is the cardinality, and ctz (count trailing zeros) is the
    -- minimum element or is the number 64 if the set is empty.
    data Bits64
      Empty : (r : Bits64) | popcnt(r) = 0, ctz(r) = 64
      Cons : (a : Bits64) -> (i : Int) -> (r : Bits64)
        | popcnt(r) = popcnt(a) + 1
        , i >= 0
        , i < 64
        , ctz(a) > i
        , ctz(r) = i

This representation is really only good for destructuring bits. Building
something this way is complicated and unnatural. How is pattern matching
implemented? The easiest options it to just call `ctz`. This gives us
64 to mean `Empty` and anything else to mean `Cons`. We immidiately know
the value of `i`, and we must mask out that bit to get the next `Bits64`
that is one level deeper. 

But this is not quite enough. In addition to being able to destructure
bits, we need to be able to express certain equivalences and test for
membership:

    or : (a : Bits64) -> (b : Bits64) -> (c : Bits64) | (forall i. member(c,i) = member(a,i) || member(b,i))
    member : Bits64 -> Int -> Bool
    singleton : (i : Int) | i >=0, i < 64 -> (r : Bits64) | member(r,i)

The functions `member` and `singleton` can be implemented with the data 
constructors from earlier. However, `member` requires recursion, and
`singleton` does not:

    member b i = case b of
      Empty -> False
      Cons b' x -> if x == i then True else member b' i
    singleton i = Cons Empty i

It might also be possible to give `or` a definition like this, but in our
case, it doesn't help us because we are destructuring the result of the
`or`, not the arguments. Lets try our array union function:

    union(maskA,maskB,elemsA,elemsB):
      maskC,{predC} = or(maskA,maskB)
      lenC = popcnt(maskC)
      dst0 = allocArray(lenC)
      go(ix,dst,mask):
        case mask of
          Empty:
            r = freeze(dst)
            (r,maskC)
          Cons mask' lo:
            open predC(lo)  // member(maskC,lo) = member(maskA,lo) || member(maskB,lo)
            case member(maskA,lo):
              True:
                ixA = popcntBelow(elemsA,lo)
                a = index(elemsA,ixA)
                dst' = write(dst,ix,a)
                ix' = ix + 1
                go(ix',dst',mask')
              False:
                ixB = popcntBelow(elemsB,lo)
                b = index(elemsB,ixB)
                dst' = write(dst,ix,b)
                ix' = ix + 1
                go(ix',dst',mask')
      go(0,dst0,maskC)

This is a rotten deal. It requires a magic `popcntBelow` that combines a shift
with a `popcnt` and requires that the integer argument is a member. A different
approach is be destructuring the argument masks in tandem. This way, we would
learn the bits set in `maskC` without actually inspecing it. Let's rewrite
`or` to expose this information:

    or : (a : Bits64) -> (b : Bits64) -> (c : Bits64)
    or Empty Empty = Empty
    or x Empty = x
    or Empty x = x
    or a0@(Cons a ia) b0@(Cons b ib) = compare ia ib:
      Eq -> Cons (or a b) ia
      Lt -> Cons (or a b0) ia
      Gt -> Cons (or a0 b) ib

When we imitate this destructuring, we will learn the top bit of `c`:

    union(maskA0,maskB0,elemsA,elemsB):
      maskC0 = or(maskA,maskB)
      lenC = popcnt(maskC)
      dst0 = allocArray(lenC)
      go(...) | ixC + popcnt(maskC) = lenC
              , ixA + popcnt(maskA) = length(elemsA)
              , ixB + popcnt(maskB) = length(elemsB)
              , maskC = or(maskA,maskB)
              , length(dst) = lenC
      go(ixC,ixA,ixB,dst,maskA,maskB,maskC0):
        case maskA of
          Empty: finishB(ixC,ixB,dst,maskB)
          Cons maskA' loA:
            case maskB of
              Empty: finishB(ixC,ixA,dst,maskA)
              Cons maskB' loB:
                compare loA loB:
                  Eq: 
                    a = index(elemsA,ixA)
                    dst' = write(dst,ixC,a)
                    ixC' = ixC + 1
                    ixA' = ixA + 1
                    ixB' = ixB + 1
                    case maskC of
                      Empty: impossible
                      Cons maskC' _: go(ixC',ixA',ixB',dst',maskA',maskB',maskC')
                  ...
      go(0,0,0,dst0,maskA0,maskB0,maskC0)

This works nicely. It is written much more like a dependently typed program
with induction bringing the right evidence into scope. One small problem is
that the case on `maskA` performs unneeded work when `maskB` is empty. It
might be possible to break up the destructuring to fix this. That is, introduce
a way to test for `Empty`/`Cons` and then offer the projection functions
on `Cons` as separate instructions to be invoked later.

Notice that `maskC` is only needed in `go` to guide a proof. It is unused. We
would want something like QTT to help with this.

# Conclusion

For this one particular problem, the solution involving a structural proof
works nicely. This works precisely because there is an implementation that
involves walking the data structurally. I'm not sure how well this same
approach will work in other settings. But at least it works for this.

It should be possible to support multiple deconstructions of bit vectors.
For example, we could do the same thing we did here but start from the
other side of the bit vector. Or we could take a totally different approach
and view them as the bit-by-bit consing of 64 booleans. Other deconstructions
might help solve other problems.

Intel has introduced compressing stores in (e.g. `_mm512_mask_compressstoreu_epi16`)
in AVX512 VBMI2. These write a number of bytes that is determined by the
`popcnt` of the mask argument. I wonder if checking most uses of these for
safety is easy or not.
