# Better Way to Track Base Object

Let's return to the sorting example from 2022-04-12:

    sort(x : Ptr Int) | hasBase(x,obj)
     -> (y : Ptr Int) | hasBase(y,obj)

An alternative to the `hasBase` construct is something that explicitly mentions
equality. This would help an SMT solve pass the constraint along as the pointer
advanced:

    sort(x : Ptr Int) | x ==. expose(obj)
     -> (y : Ptr Int) | y ==. expose(obj)

Above, `obj` is of type P where P looks like this:

    data P = Array ArrayVar | Object ObjectVar Member

In the object case, the member must be of an appropriate type. A `sort` function
that was only allow to operator on pointers that belonged to arrays would look
like this (there is no good reason to introduce this restriction though):

    sort(x : Ptr Int) | x ==. expose(Array arr)
     -> (y : Ptr Int) | y ==. expose(Array arr)

The type of `read`, for access the element at a pointer, is:

    read(x : Ptr a) | x ==. expose(obj) +. n, n >= 0, sizeof(obj) > n
     -> (y : a)

That is, the pointer must be in bounds. The definition of `read` doesn't play nicely
with an SMT solver. I don't think so at least. It's looking for something with a
particular shape, and I'm not sure that SMT solvers handle this well. I need to
experiment more. Assuming this works, a more realistic `sort` that can handle slices
might look like this:

    sort(x : Ptr Int, len : Int) | x ==. expose(obj) +. off
                                 , len >= 0
                                 , off >= 0
                                 , off + len <= sizeof(obj)
     -> (y : Ptr Int) | y ==. x

# Array Liveliness

The difficult problem is actually using this information when generating code.
In the case of the `sort` function, all you really want is for the caller (`obj`
or `arr` are erased and not actually passed in) to stick the base object on the
stack before calling the function (assuming that `sort` can trigger GC). That's not
too bad. In theory, it could go into a register, but it would just need to get
spilled to the stack before GC, so there is no point in doing that.

What about inside of a function though. Maybe the only thing needed is to count
base objects (the arguments to `expose`) as live when tracking object liveliness.
The `read` function requires that its argument pointer be based on something. It
should be possible to figure out just what that something is. This proposed type
signature of `read` means that we cannot use it on something known to be based on
one of two different objects. It must be based on a single object. This will
rule out some good programs, but I don't think it's too onerous a restricion.

So, for a series of let bindings, it just extends the liveliness of the base object.
How do we handle a join point? Consider:

    sumAndRet(x : Ptr) | x ==. expose(obj) +. off, ...
          -> Int
    case b of
      True -> sumAndRet(a)
      False -> sumAndRet(b)

Assume that `a` and `b` have different base objects. In the generated code, the base
object must be passed to `sumAndRet` so that it can be kept live (and so that the
other object can die). I think I'm beginning to see how this could work. Every `Ptr`
values is really two values: the interior pointer and the base. At first, this seems
bad because it seems like you would double your register pressure. And for join
points, it really does work that way. But, in the case of function calls, it doesn't.
In particular, nested function calls could avoid the threading the base object through.
It's on the caller to save the base object to the stack, and this just works out
nicely. The drawback is that the containing object might be kept alive too long.

So, there are two strategies:

1. Exact liveliness tracking. Copies the base pointer into everywhere the interior
   pointer goes.
2. Approximate liveliness tracking. Push the base pointer onto the stack at an
   opportune time, and it might keep the base object alive longer than needed.

For function calls, either strategy works. For join points, we can also do either.
When feeding an interior pointer into a join poin, we just push the base pointer
onto the stack (it doesn't actually grow the stack, there's just a reserved spot
for it). This keeps it live for the rest of the function.

For both functions and join points, we are able to prevent unsafe pointer returns
by not allowing result refinements to refer to existentially quantified variables.
This requirement bothers me. If existential quantification were allowed, how could
we make this safe? I think it could be done. The base object would need to be
returned as well as the interior pointer. Then, the base object could be referenced
in the result refinement.
