# Let and Sequencing Let (Bind)

Sometimes, we need a way to keep operations in order. In Haskell, this is
called `IO`, and it uses a state token to keep everything in order. A
different approach is to introduce a separate construct for sequencing
operations. I want to explore that here. The `let` construct has the
following typing rule:

    C |- a:A    C,x:A |- y:B
    ---------------------------- let-rule
    C |- (let x = a in y) : B

Now, what about a sequenced `let`, referred to from this point on as `bind`?
We need this the sequencing to be reflected in the types. Let us have:

    A, B, ... : Ground -- ground types
    Sequencing = Sequenced | Unsequenced 
    Type : Sequencing -> Ground -> *
    Function : Sequencing -> Func
    (->) : Type Unsequenced in -> Type s out -> Function s

Now, let-rule becomes:

    A=Type Unsequenced AGr   C |- a:A    C,x:A |- y:b
    -------------------------------------------------- let-rule
    C |- (let x = a in y) : b

And bind works like this:

    A=Type Sequenced AGr   A'=Type Unsequenced AGr   B=Type Sequenced BGr C |- a:A    C,x:A' |- y:B
    ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- bind-rule
    C |- (bind x = a in y) : B

So, what's going on is that `let` completely preserves the type of `a`,
but `bind` changes it to an Unsequenced type since evaluation has 
completed. Additionally, `let` allows `y` to have either a sequenced
type or an unsequenced type, but `bind` requires it to have a
sequenced type. Technically, `bind` could be made more forgiving.
Then, instead of propogating the type `B`, it would alter it to
make it sequenced. However, I think it is better to require that
this be done explicitly with a "lift" operation, but I'm not
exactly sure why I feel this way.

Constructs like `case` and join points should play nicely with
this. The scrutinee of `case` must be Unsequenced, but the arms
can be anything as long as they match. Let's look at some examples:

    // Read a file. Parse the contents.
    bind x = readFile("/home/example/foo.txt")
    let people = parsePeople(x)
    lift(x)

Note that this is equivalent to:

    bind x = readFile("/home/example/foo.txt")
    lift(parsePeople(x))

And then one where we case on the results of `bind`:

    bind x = readFileAtHardCodedPathAndDecode()
    case x of
      Attack:
        bind r = issueAttack()
        lift(r)
      DoNothing:
        lift(0)
