# Debruijn Indices for Simultaneously Bound Identifiers

This is a variation on debruijn indices that I'm sure has been invented
independently a hundred times, but I've never seen anyone describe it.
Here's the idea. Let's take an example function with names first:

    function example(x,y,z):
      a = x + y
      b = z + y
      a + b + z

Translating this to use debruijn indices requires that `x` be bound *before*
`y` (and similarly `y` bound before `z`). This is not quite natural. What
if, instead, each debruijn index has two parts: a group identifier and a value
identifier. We may translate the above example to:

    function example($_.0, $_.1, $_.2):
      group
        $_.0 = $0.0 + $0.1
      group
        $_.0 = $1.2 + $1.1
      $1.0 + $0.0 + $2.1

Since `b` does not depend on `a` we could move them into the same group instead:

    function example($_.0, $_.1, $_.2):
      group
        // Non-recursive bindings. Zero refers to the bindings
        // in the first group before this one (in this case,
        // the function arguments).
        $_.0 = $0.0 + $0.1
        $_.1 = $1.2 + $1.1
      $0.0 + $0.1 + $1.1

That's the whole trick. Here are the reasons that I have found this (along with
the let-binding groups) to be useful:

1. In a functional programming language, it is desirable to sink let bindings
   as close to their use site as possible. However, if we perform this transformation
   over and over again, we might never reach a fixed point. In the above example,
   there would be no fixed point because neither `a` nor `b` depends on the other. 
   Having the fixed point be possible is nice.
2. A group is allowed to be empty. The helps a little bit when implementing
   dead code elimination, but it doesn't help a whole lot.

I've done this with join points (including recursive join points), and it works
nicely for those as well. I've never explored doing something like this with
types or modules. Types need to be able to be defined recursively, so this
would require something like the solution for recursive join points:

    // Inside of the group, group $0 refers to the group being defined
    // This defines a tree type and an auxiliary list type
    recursive group
      type $0.0 = Branch $0.1 | Leaf Int
      type $0.1 = Cons $0.0 $0.1 | Nil

I'm not sure if there are any benefits to breaking types into separate groups
when they do not refer to each other. Typechecking might benefit from making
dependencies more clear. If you had several totally independent types, you
could express them as:

    group
      type $_.0 = ...
      type $_.1 = ...
      type $_.2 = ...

And the implementation of the typechecker could consider these three
concurrently. In practice, concurrency here is unlikely to buy us any
performance, but it could buy us other things like better error reporting.

With a module system, we end up with types, modules, and functions actually
having meaningful names (identifiers bound by `let` inside function bodies
do not end up with meaningful names though). The distinction between using
a name and using a debruijn index ends up providing insight into the system.
Consider an indefinite module:

    module OrderedMap (signature ordering : Ordering):
      type Map v
      insert : Map v -> ordering.T -> v -> Map v
      fromList : [Pair ordering.T v] -> Map v
      fromList xs = ... insert(accumulator,k,v) ...

Inside `fromList`, we call `insert`. How is this desugared? We cannot refer
`OrderedMap` all the way from the top (e.g. `Stdlib.Collections.OrderedMap`)
because it has to be the `insert` from the same instantiation. Instead,
we can write

    $0.insert(accumulator,k,v)

Which means that we go up one level to the current module, which happens to
be indefinite in this case. In the absence of indefinite modules, we could
express all function references as paths from the top down.
