# Syntax for Mid-Level IR

Here are some ideas for a mid-level IR syntax for a language that
supports modules, module functors, functions, and types. I will try
to refer to all four of these as "components".

## Functions and General Scoping

We use curly braces with semicolons to introduce locally scoped identifiers,
and the thing at the end is what is actually returned. It is not named like
the other terms are.

    { foo = function(...)(...) { }
    ; bar = function(...)(...)
      { foo(...)
      ; ...
      }
    ; bar
    }

This defines a helper function `foo` and an exposed function `bar`. The
exposed function is locally named `bar`, but outside of this context, it
is likely bound to a different name. For example:

    { baz =
      { foo = function(...)(...) { ... }
      ; bar = function(...)(...) { ... }
      ; bar
      }
    ; ...
    }

In the above examples, the identifier on the LHS has nothing indicating its
type. However, an optional type annotation may be provided:

    { foo : function(int, string)(bool) = function(x : int, y : string)(bool) { ... }
    ; ...
    }

## Modules

Functions are introduced by the `function` keyword. Modules are introduced
by the `module` keyword. In a module, the components are delimited by commas
rather than semicolons. This indicates concurrent (rather than sequential)
binding.

    { internalMintImpl = function(amount : int)(bool) { ... }
    ; bankAccount = module
      { deposit = function(amount : int)(int) { ... }
      , withdraw = function(amount : int)(int) { ... }
      , mint = internalMintImpl
      }
    ; function(...)(...)
      { balance = bankAccount.deposit(50)
      ; ...
      }
    }

The type of the `bankAccount` module is inferred. It is possible to provide
a type annotation for `bankAccount`:

    { internalMintImpl = ...
    ; bankAccount : module
      { deposit : function(int)(int)
      , withdraw : function(int)(int)
      , mint : function(int)(bool)
      } = module { ... }
    ; ...
    }

Both the `function` and `module` keywords are used at the term level and the
type level. We may introduce type aliases as members of a module:

    intKey : module { t : type, lt : function(t,t)(bool) } = module
      { t = int
      , lt = ltInt
      }

I don't like this type annotation. In it, `t` and `lt` are not bound
concurrently since the type signature for `lt` referrences `t`. Note
that the annotation could also be written as: 

    intKey : module { t : type = int, lt : function(int,int)(bool) } = module
      { t = int
      , lt = ltInt
      }

This variant exposes the representation of `t`. SML refers to this distinction
as opaque vs. transparent.

## Module Functors

Module functors are similar to modules, but they accept a single argument.
They do not accept tuples with multiple arguments. Multi-argument module
functors are accomplished with currying.

    { orderedSet = functor
      ( key : module
        { t : type
        , lt : function(t,t)(bool)
        }
      ) module
      { collection : type = ...
      , insert : function(collection,key.t)(collection) = ...
      }
    ; intSet = orderedSet(intKey)
    ; ...
    }

The argument and the result can be any component, not just modules. They can be
functions, types, functors, or modules.

## Misc. Thoughts

### Module Signatures

This language does not include a way to define a "module signature", an alias
for a module type. It's not a fundamental feature, so I left it out. Anything
that could be accomplished with module signature could also be accomplished by
inlining their definition everywhere. We do support type aliases, so it seems
like module signatures should just fall out of this naturally. Currently, we
can only write aliases for types. I should about the kind system more.

### No Recursive Bindings

Recursive bindings have been mostly omitted. Anything bound sequentially is
only in scope *after* its definition, not before it. In the definition of
ordered sets, I made one of a module type's concurrently bound components
refer to another one:

    functor
      ( key : module
        { t : type
        , lt : function(t,t)(bool)
        }
      ) ...

In theory, there could be some special rule that lets modules refer to
concurrently bound types, but I would like to avoid this. What about this:

    // Note: does not work
    functor
      ( outer : functor(t0 : type)
        { functor (key : module)
          { t : type = t0
          , lt : function(t0,t0)(bool)
          }
        }
      ) ...

This does not mean the right thing, and it does not work. We really need
a dependent pair (a sigma type). Perhaps we could say, in a module type
signature, that the types are not introduced concurrently, and anything
may refer to an earlier type. So this would be allowed:

    foo : module
      { a : type
      , b : type = a
      , combine : function(a,b)(b)
      }

But referencing `b` in the (optional) RHS of `a` would not be allowed.
Now we've got to make sure that the typechecker can answer questions like:

    module { t : type = int, lt : function(int,int)(bool) }
    <:?
    module { t : type, lt : function(t,t)(bool) }

The answer should be yes. The first module type is a subtype of the second
one. That is, if a functor expects a module with the second type, we ought to
be able to safely use a module with the first type. Put more simply, we should
be able to freely upcast a module from the first type to the second type
anywhere. I'm sure this is doable. Every SML compiler must do this. In the
example above, it's enough to observe that `t ~ int`, changing the type of `lt`.
We need to be able to ask "is X a subtype of Y under type equality set T".
And I'm sure there is a way to do this.

### Types and Recursive Types

In the system that I imagine, all types are defined as aliases. Haskell and SML
both distinguish type aliases from "data types" with nominal type equality.
Here is an example of what I envision:

    key = int
    person = constructed
      { person { name : string, age : int }
      }
    person2 = constructed
      { person { name : string, age : int }
      }
    tree = constructed
      { branch { left : recurse, right : recurse } 
      , leaf { value : int }
      }

Each constructed type is characterized by data constructors paired with named
fields. Consequently, `person ~ person2`. They cannot be distinguished.

Notice that `tree` cannot refer to itself. When we project with `myTree.left`,
we should get a value of type `tree`. So, type synthesis for projection is
not as simple as looking up a value in a map. We must also track the nearest
`constructed` and replace `recurse` with it if the field has type `recurse`.
It's actually even worse. We need to allow `recurse` with debruijn indices.
See 2023-11-29 for an example of this.

### Think About Module Signatures Again

Module signatures really are a lot like type aliases. The more I think about
this, the more it bothers me. I think a want different keyword for types:

    bankAccount : signature
    { deposit : int -> int
    , withdraw : int -> int
    , mint : int -> bool
    } = module { ... }

Because now we can do this:

    ; bankAccountSig = signature
      { deposit : int -> int
      , withdraw : int -> int
      , mint : int -> bool
      }
    ; bankAccount : bankAccountSig = module { ... }

So maybe we have these pairings for term vs type:

    function()(){}  / A -> B (A and B have kind type)       / alias
    module{}        / signature{}                           / alias
    values          / int,bool,float                        / type  / alias
    functor(){}     / A => B (A and B have kind alias)      / alias
    (Note from 2023-12-21: functor kind does not capture possible dependent type)
    (See [Functor Dependent Type] on 2023-12-21)

We can now define these:

    eqSig : alias = signature {t : type, eq : (t,t) -> bool}
    intEndo : alias = int -> int
    twice = functor(f : intEndo) function(x : int)(int) { f(f(x)) }
    // Inferred, twice : (int -> int) => (int -> int)
    intBinRel : alias = (int,int) -> bool

Function and functor look very similar, but they differ slightly.
Function accepts tuples, and functor is curried. Function is more
"ground level" than functor. Note that although we are able to
define `intBinRel` above, we cannot define a more general `binRel`
that works on all types. This is not well formed:

    binRel = functor(x : type) ((x,x) -> bool)

Because it would have kind `type => alias`, and `alias` does not have kind
`alias`. Maybe we could do the type-of-type thing and have `alias : alias`,
but I don't think that being able to define aliases like this is that
important. It feels like `functor` would be starting to do more than what
it is intended for. If we really needed this, we could just add a different
keyword for it:

    binRel = arrow(x)((x,x) -> bool)
