# Mid-Level IR Preceeding Interpretation

## Features

Features of the mid-level IR I want are:

* Full monomorphization (including refinements).
  No variables of any kind at the type level.
* All function arguments are values (no HOF)
* There are no modules. Single namespace for everything.
* In this single namespace, we have:
  * Functions. The order of their definition matters. Recursion is supported
    but not mutual recursion is not.
  * Values. The order of their definition matters. No recursion of any kind.
  * Types. These do support mutual recursion. They have to. This is explained
    below at Why Types Are Mutually Recursive.
* Uniqueness annotations (or linearity). 

## Why Types Are Mutually Recursive

In a higher-level IR (with polymorphism), consider this:

    data TextMap a = Bin (Map a) (Map a) | Tip a
    data JsonValue
      = Null
      | JsonMap (TextMap JsonValue)

These types are both recursive, but there is no mutual recursion. However,
when we monomorphize, we get this:

    data TextMap<JsonValue> = Bin (Map JsonValue) (Map JsonValue) | Tip JsonValue
    data JsonValue
      = Null
      | JsonMap TextMap<JsonValue>

And we end up with mutual recursion. Let's see how this lowering might look
with a module system involved:

    data TextMap a = Bin (Map a) (Map a) | Tip a
    insert : forall (a : *). Text -> a -> Map a -> Map a
    ==>
    module TextMap(A : *) where
      data X = Bin X X | Tip A
    module Insert(A : *) where
      M = TextMap(A)
      func : Text -> A -> M.X -> M.X

Alright, this seems like it works well. Now let's see how it works with the two
types mentioned earlier:

    data TextMap a = Bin (Map a) (Map a) | Tip a
    data JsonValue
      = Null
      | JsonMap (TextMap JsonValue)
    ==>
    decl JsonValue // these are all nullary type constructors
    module TextMap(A : *) where
      data X = Bin X X | Tip A
    M = TextMap(JsonValue)
    data JsonValue
      = Null
      | JsonMap M.X
    ==>
    decl JsonValue
    M = module TextMap<JsonValue> where
      data X = Bin X X | Tip JsonValue
    data JsonValue
      = Null
      | JsonMap M.X
    ==>
    decl JsonValue, TextMap<JsonValue>[X]
    TextMap<JsonValue>[X] = Bin TextMap<JsonValue>[X] TextMap<JsonValue>[X] | Tip JsonValue
    data JsonValue
      = Null
      | JsonMap TextMap<JsonValue>[X]

The forward declarations do not actually need to be implemented by
tracking them separately. Modules have an order and do not support
recursion. Types have no order and can reference one another freely.
Whenever we see a module without any arguments (i.e. not a module functor),
we lift all of its components up to the top level and then rewrite
all the downstream references. If we just keep doing this over and over,
eventually all the modules should be gone.

## Uniqueness

I had originally been thinking that it would be acceptable to forbid unique
types from being used as arguments to type constructors. A problem with this
restriction is that it makes it impossible to implement functions that operate
on a unique value and might fail. For example, either of these:

    attemptIncrementAt : (MutableArray Int, Int) -> Option (MutableArray Int)
    read               : (MutableArray U8, Int)  -> (MutableArray U8, Int)

How can we deconstruct the results? In the first case, we need to be able to
scrutinize the `Option`, but we can only scrutinize it once. In the second
case, we should be able to project out the second element as many times as
we want, but we should only be able to project the first element once.
Actually, the same strategy might work for the `Option` value as well.
For example:

    r = attemptIncrementAt(xs,i)
    case r
      None -> ...
      Some -> ... r.value ...

There is a problem though. Inside of the `Some` case, the `r` is actually a
different `r` that shaddows the original, so this does not work quite right.
With the desugaring:

    r0 = attemptIncrementAt(xs,i)
    case r0
      None{r1} -> ...
      Some{r1} -> ... r1.value ...

The uniqueness checker needs to understand the relationship between `r0`
and `r1`. I think this is possible. We cannot write `r0.value` since that
does not typecheck. We need to prevent this: 

    r0 = attemptIncrementAt(xs,i)
    case r0
      None{r1} -> ...
      Some{r1} -> ... r1.value ...
    case r0
      None{r2} -> ...
      Some{r2} -> ... r2.value ...

Here, the uniqueness checker needs to understand that `r1` and `r2` are,
in some sense, the same. I think this is doable. I think that we only
want to support fields with unique types for stack allocated types. Tuples
and `Option` both fall into this category. I don't see a type-theoric
reason that that won't work for heap-allocated types though. Actually,
the main problem with heap-allocated types is that they can be defined
recursively. For example: List (a cons list). Having a list of unique
values doesn't work becausewe cannot guarantee unique consumption.
But even for stack allocated types we still have a restriction that
type variables must be nonunique. For example:

    fromOption : forall a. a -> Option a -> a

Having `a` be unique does not make much sense. Technically, it works.
(Although the implementation for a linear `a` would not even typecheck.)

## Regions?

Region types are not compatible with this kind of monomorphization.
Region types require some kind of construct that introduces a type variable
inside of a value expression. Monomorphization needs this kind of thing to
not be allowed.
