# Recursive Modules

This continues an idea from the section titled "Mutually Recursive Functions"
in the 2023-12-29 entry. The idea was that, with enough annotations, we could
have mutually recursive modules as well. Let's take an example from 2022-03-22.
Originally, I wrote this as:

    data Atom
      = Var VarId
      | Int Int64
    sig X
      type Arg
    module Y (X x)
      data Term
        = Atomic Atom
        | Let VarId Term Term
        | App FuncId (Array x.Arg)
    module AtomArg
      type Arg = Atom
    module Anf = Y(AtomArg)
    // These last two are defined recursively
    module TermArg
      type Arg = NonAnf.Term
    module NonAnf = Y(TermArg)

I'm going to rename `NonAnf` to `Std`. I'll use a different convention
for components (modules, functions, types, functors). And I make `App`
take a single argument instead of an array of arguments:

    { Atom : Type = constructed
      { Var { var : VarId }
      , Int { int : Int64 }
      }
    ; X : Alias = Module
      { Arg : Type
      , eq : Function(Arg,Arg)(Bool)
      }
    ; Y : Functor(X)(Module{...}) = functor(x)
      { T : Type = constructed
        { Atomic { atomic : Atom }
        , Let { binder : VarId, rhs : $0, in : $0 }
        , App { function : FuncId, arg : x.Arg }
        }
      // We define eq in a recursive binding group with just itself
      ; recursive equals : Function(T,T)(Bool) = function(a : T, b : T)(Bool)
        { case (a, b)
          { (App f0 arg0, App f1 arg1) -> and(eqFunc(f0,f1), x.eq(arg0,arg1))
          , (Let v0 rhs0 body0, Let v1 rhs1 body1) -> and(eqVar(v0,v1), equals(rhs0,rhs1), equals(body0,body1))
          , (_, _) -> ...
          }
        }
      ; module
        { Term : Type = T
        , eq : Function(T,T)(Bool) = equals
        }
      }
    ; AnfArg : Module {...} = module
      { Arg : Type = Atom
      , eq : Function(Atom,Atom)(Bool) = ... // implementation is trivial
      }
    ; Anf : Module {...} = Y(AnfArg)
    ; StdTerm : Type = constructed
      { Atomic { atomic : Atom }
      , Let { binder : VarId, rhs : $0, in : $0 }
      , App { function : FuncId, arg : $0 }
      }
    ; recursive
      { StdArg : Module {Arg : Type, eq : Function(StdTerm,StdTerm)(Bool)} = module
        { Arg : Type = StdTerm
        , eq : Function(StdTerm,StdTerm)(Bool) = Std.equals
        }
      , Std : Module {Term : Type, eq : Function(StdTerm,StdTerm)(Bool)} = Y(StdArg)
      }
    }

Every binder in a recursive group must be annotated with a type signature.
It's easy to see that typechecking `StdArg` and `Std` in the final recursive
group is straightforward. Since types are defined is structurally, not nominally,
it is possible to define `StdTerm` outside of the group of recursively defined
modules. It's really just `eq` that needs the the recursive bindings.

Something that I'm still trying to figure out as I work through this example
is whether or not module signatures need to support RHSs on types. For example,
above, `StdArg` doesn't actually have the correct type to be passed as an
argument to `Y`. I think that we actually want this:

    StdArg : Module {Arg : Type = StdTerm, eq : Function(StdTerm,StdTerm)(Bool)}

Which should be equivalent to this:

    StdArg : Module {Arg : Type = StdTerm, eq : Function(Arg,Arg)(Bool)}

Also, we could possibly define a `Z` that nails down the argument type:

    Z : Functor(Module{eq : Function(StdTerm,StdTerm)(Bool)})(Module{...}) =
      functor(m) { Y(... m ...) }

This is strange, and I do not see a path forward for it. What if functors just
took their types and their functions separately:

    Y : Functor(Arg : Type)(Functor (Module{eq : Function(Arg,Arg)(Bool)})(Module{...})) =
      functor(Arg : Type) functor (x : Module{eq : Function(Arg,Arg)(Bool)}) { ... }

Now `Z` is easily defined as `Y(StdTerm)`. I really like this approach. Now, we
do not need module signatures to have a special rule that allows them to be
defined slightly recursively.

Now, our final recursive group looks like this:

    {
    ...
    ; recursive
      { StdArg : Module {eq : Function(StdTerm,StdTerm)(Bool)} = module
        { eq : Function(StdTerm,StdTerm)(Bool) = Std.equals
        }
      , Std : Module {Term : Type, eq : Function(StdTerm,StdTerm)(Bool)} = Y(StdTerm)(StdArg)
      }
    }

Technically, we do not need for `Y` to include `Term` but it is nice that
it does. Alright, well, this is at least improving. I still need to figure
out how to evaluating recursively bound components.
