# Data Constructor Invariants

This is an idea for a kind of crummy version of DT that could help out
the optimizer in a language that distinguishes between mutable and
immutable objects. The idea is that data constructors could support
simple invariants:

    data Map v
      = Leaf
          height: Int
          values: Array (Int,v)
      | Branch
          height: Int
          children: Array (Int,Map v)
    invariant: Leaf.height = 0
    invariant: Branch.height > 0
    invariant: Branch.height < 40
    invariant: length(Leaf.values) >= 4
    invariant: length(Branch.children) >= 4
    invariant: length(Leaf.values) < 8
    invariant: length(Branch.children) < 8

This isn't completely correct for a B-Tree since we need some way to support
a root node with fewer values/children than what the degree suggests. But
let's ignore that wrinkle for now. The way this would work is that when
a mutable Map object was frozen, all the invariants would be checked, and
the program would terminate with an unrecoverable exception if an invariant
was not satisfied. The `length` invariants work a little differently since
they can be checked at allocation time. But the checks on the height can
do not need to happen until the object is frozen.

Here are the advantages of this strategy:

* Anyone using an immutable object may assume that all of the invariants
  hold. In particular, the optimizer may assume this, which makes it
  possible to elide certain bounds checks.
* Many of the freeze-time assertions can be elided if the optimizer can
  reason statically that they always hold.

Here are the disadvantages of this strategy:

* We cannot express sophisticated invariants that full dependent types
  support. For example, there is a height invariant for B-Trees that says
  that the height of all child nodes is the predecessor of the height of
  the parent node.
* These invariants have a strange relationship with full dependent types.
  They are tied to the data type, so a single data type cannot have
  different sets of invariants that are enforced in different contexts.

What motivates doing this? The problem with a solution involving dependent
types is that it can be difficult to be sure that an invariant actually
holds at some call site. The only way to do this is to hide the data
constructors of a type and write proofs for every single function that
operates on it. I'm not sure if it is practical to do this or not.
