# More Thoughts About Refinements and Modules

The interaction between refinements and module systems is tricky. Let's
look at negative-position signatures:

    signature Eq
      type T
      eq : T -> T -> Bool
    module EqInt
      type T = Int
      eq = builtInEqInt

We can use `EqInt` to compare integers, but we can also use it to compare
refined integers. For example, if we have values of type `Int | <1000`,
we can just upcast them, discarding the refinement, and now we have
values of the right type. It gets trickier when we start working with
monomorphic collections. Rather than writing out a signature, let's
just look at a concrete example. Here is one way to deal with `IntSet`:

    IntSet : (Predicate : IntPred) -> *
    insert : forall (p : IntPred). (Int | p) -> IntSet p -> IntSet p

This strategy attaches the predicate to the set. A different strategy
is to make `IntSet` a not-quite-parametrically-polymorphic type:

    IntSet : (_ <: Int : *) -> *
    insert : forall (i <: Int : *). i -> IntSet i -> IntSet i

To me, this feel better. It also lets us do things like this:

    // Int set backed by 64-bit word
    TinyIntSet : (_ <: (Int | >=0, <=63) : *) -> *
    insert : forall (i <: (Int | >=0, <=63). i -> IntSet i -> IntSet i

If we do this, then our collection interface needs to look like this:

    signature Foldable
      type ElementBound : *
      type Collection : (_ <: ElementBound : *) -> *
      fold : forall (b : *) (a <: ElementBound : *).
        (b -> a -> b) -> b -> Collection a -> b

But what about `Eq`? Should we make `Eq` work the same way?

    signature Eq
      type T : *
      eq : forall (t <: T : *). t -> t -> Bool

If we want to be able to use `Eq` and `Foldable` together (to build
`any` and `all` functions for example), then they need to work the same way.
I am not certain what to do. It's worth noting that signatures using the
type in an invariant way do not have this option at all. For example,
the `Semigroup` signature has to nail down the exact type.

    any : (f : Foldable, eq : Eq, eq.T = f.ElementBound)
      => forall (t <: eq.T : *). (t -> Bool) -> f.Collection t -> Bool

This is terrible. No one wants to use a system like this. We need something
more clean, something that doesn't even present bound types as an option.

Let's take a take back. What about a monomorphic foldable:

    signature Foldable
      type Element : *
      type Collection : *
      fold : forall (b : *).
        (b -> Element -> b) -> b -> Collection -> b
    signature Eq
      type T : *
      eq : T -> T -> Bool
    any : (f : Foldable, eq : Eq, eq.T = f.Element)
      => (eq.T -> Bool) -> f.Collection -> Bool
    signature FoldablePoly
      type Collection : * -> *
      fold : forall (a : *) (b : *).
        (b -> a -> b) -> b -> Collection a -> b
    functor MonomorphizeFoldable(f : FoldablePoly, e : *) where
      type Collection = f.Collection e
      fold = f.fold @e

This is nice. Where does this start to break down:

* Monomorphic Traversable
* Subtyping

Let's see. First the monomorphic traversable:

    signature Traversable
      type Element : *
      type Collection : *
      functor Traverse(m : Monad)
        traverse : (Element -> m.M Element) -> Collection -> m.M Collection
    signature TraversablePoly
      type Collection : * -> *
      // Requires higher-order modules
      functor Traverse(m : Monad)
        traverse : (a -> m.M b) -> Collection a -> m.M (Collection b)
    module ListTraversablePoly
      type Collection = List
      functor Traverse(m : Monad)
        traverse : (a -> m.M b) -> List a -> m.M (List b)
        traverse f Nil = m.pure []
        traverse f (Cons x xs) =
          // just pretend recurse is kind of magic
          m.liftA2 Cons (f x) (recurse xs)
    functor MonomorphizeTraversable(f : TraversablePoly, e : *)
      type Collection = f.Collection e
      functor Traverse(m : Monad)
        instantiation = f.Traverse(m)
        traverse : (e -> m.M e) -> f.Collection e -> m.M (f.Collection e)
        traverse = instantiation.traverse

This part actually works out reasonably well. Let's think about scenario
where we might have a traversable collection of monomorphic values. The
examples given in the `mono-traversable` library on hackage are `ByteString`
and `Text`.

* `ByteString` is only a monomorphic collection because of limitations of GHC.
  In another language, it could be `Array U8`, and then the normal
  `Traversable` could be used with it.
* The type of `Text` not just an artifact of GHC's limitation (it cannot
  simply be defined as `Array Char`), and there are other things like it (various
  integer sequences that use variable-length encoding). However, traversing
  (even non-monadically) any of these collection types is bad because the
  performance will be awful. These are optimized for reads, not for rebuilds.
* `IntSet` has a `MonoFoldable` instance. I think that it is reasonable to want
  this. I feel the same way about the `MonoFoldable` instance for `Text`.

So, as I think about it more, I don't really believe that `MonoTraversable` is
particularly useful as an abstraction. That is, beyond overloading names, it
doesn't seem to offer anything. But `MonoFoldable` really is 

But when we start trying to
deal with refined types, things fall apart. The problem is that 
in more trouble. 
