# Type System Incorporating Everything I Want

Here is want I am trying to get:

* Refinements
* Lightweight dependent types (only two levels)
* Uniqueness types (no uniqueness polymorphism, just for mutability)
* Stack, heap, and region allocation

I wanted to explore how these might all fit together. Here is what a
type looks like:

    Type =
      | Concrete
          TypeConstructor // constructor
          [Type]          // arguments, all immutable types
          Mutability
          Refinements
          Allocation
      | Variable TypeVariable
    Allocation =
      | Region RegionVariable
      | Heap
      | Stack

For example, we might have something like this:

    PersonTyCon, [], Immutable, {}, Region r

for a `Person` object that was allocated into region `r`.
And for an integer, we might have:

    IntTyCon, [64], Immutable, {? >= 0, ? < 100}, Stack

And for an array of people, we might have:

    ArrayTyCon, [n,Person], Immutable, {}, Heap

A type variable only represents non-unique (immutable) types. So, the identity
function looks like this:

    identity : forall a. a -> a

But we cannot instantiate `a` with anything mutable. This work nicely
with the restriction on type constructors. We cannot apply a type
constructor to any mutable types. We can apply type constructors to
types with any kind of refinements. Allocation is tricky though. We
can freely apply type constructors to stack-allocated types, but we

* cannot apply a region-allocated type constructor to a type that lives in
  a different region

So, a type like this is ill formed:

    List{Region r1} Person{Region r2}

If we want to support abstraction of type constructors, we are in a weird
position with regions. If we have some type constructor `t` kinded
`* -> *`, then there is some relationship between the argument type's
allocation policy and the type constructor's allocation policy. Consider
these well formed type applications:

    List{Stack} Person{Heap}
    List{Stack} Person{Region r3}
    List{Stack} Person{Stack}
    List{Heap} Person{Stack}
    List{Heap} Person{Region r3}
    List{Heap} Person{Heap}
    List{Region r3} Person{Stack}
    List{Region r3} Person{Region r3}
    List{Region r3} Person{Heap}

Actually, almost every combination is well formed. It's just the
region-region case that is special. Perhaps we should just allow it.
If we allow `List{Region r3} Person{Region r2}`, nothing bad really
happens. We just have to walk the cons cells during GC to look at
all the elements, but that's the same thing we would be doing for
the region-heap case.

Let's think about JSON. Consider the syntax tree:

    data Value r =
      | Object (MemberMap{Region r} (Value{Region r} r)
      | Array (Array{Region r} (Value{Region r} r))
      | String Text{Heap}
      | True
      | False
      | Null
      | Number ... // ignore number, it's complicated

The one allocation policy that it might make sense to make this polymorphic
in is the one for `Text`. Why? Well, if the text from which the JSON is
parsed is already in the same region as everything else, then we would
want to leave the text values in that region. Plus, text that uses
escape sequences cannot be shared with the input anyway. So, we might
want:

    // Note: s should be either Heap or Region r, never Stack.
    data Value s r =
      | Object (MemberMap{Region r} (Value{Region r} s r)
      | Array (Array{Region r} (Value{Region r} s r))
      | String Text{s}
      | ...

We probably want some nice user-facing syntax for recursive types that
mention regions. It's annoying to have to write `Value{Region r} r`,
which mentions `r` twice.

Being able to allocate the byte sequence straight into the same region
that the JSON will be decoded to like an uncommon situation, but it
might be possible for a CLI application that accepts JSON on stdin.

Also, we really need the heap-region-stack distinction to look more like
this:

    data Heap = Global | Region RegionVar
    data Allocation = Heap Heap | Stack

This way, we can have variables that are only able to talk about types
on allocation on the heap (be it global or regional). For array-like
types of unknown length, we cannot allocate them on the stack
because variable-length stack allocation is awful. We end up with
functions that look like this:

    parseEscape : Bytes{Heap h} -> Option{Stack} Text{Heap h}

The body of this function might be able to share the memory that
backs its argument, or it may have to allocate more memory to escape
characters. But this works with both the global heap and with regions.
It could not work with the stack since it needs to perform variable-length
allocations.
