# Types, Data Type Declaration, and Module Signatures

Signatures need to support type components. These types can be either abstract
or concrete. For example:

    sig Foo
      type X
    sig Bar
      type Y = S64

But what about user-defined types? In SML, it is possible to put a user-defined
datatype (one with data constructors) into a signature. For example:

    sig Map
      type Key
      type Value
      datatype M = Bin Map Key Map | Tip Key Value

When you implement `Map`, you end up copying the definition of `M` into the
implementation. How important is this feature? In SML, one common use of
signatures is to hide (or expose) data types.
See https://stackoverflow.com/questions/26800360/how-to-avoid-sml-datatype-repetition-in-structures-and-signatures 
for example. But I am not interesting in this feature. I am fine with all
data types implementations always being exposed. It is possible to hide
the implementation by making the consumer of the module a module functor.
But in that case, is it useful to have the signature (of the module functor's
argument) expose a full data type declaration? Or can we hack around it
when we need to do this? One solution is introducing patterns:

    sig Map
      type Key : *
      type Value : *
      type M : *
      pattern Bin : (Map,Key,Map) -> M
      pattern Tip : (Key,Value) -> M

With this, we don't end up with a way to communicate "these are all of the
patterns" (GHC's `COMPLETE` pragma), so anyone performing a pattern match
would need to introduce a useless wildcard pattern at the end that threw an
unrecoverable exception. But I think this is a decent option. It makes it
possible to expose a single pattern of many, although I don't know how useful
this is in practice. It's also easy to start by not doing this and then add it
later if it turns out to be important.

# SML Where Type Clauses

SML97 has an important construct called `where type`. Here is an example from
the SML97 spec:

    signature SIG1 = sig type t; val x: t end;
    signature SIG2 = SIG1 where type t = int*int;

To me, the more interesting use of this is a module functor where two types
from different signatures are constrained to be equal. The spec does not
have an example of this, but it looks like this:

    functor Server(X : sig structure Buffer : BUFFER; structure Parser : PARSER end where type X.Buffer.Foo = X.Parser.Bar)

And I believe this is admitted as a shorthand (this might be slightly wrong):

    functor Server(structure Buffer : BUFFER; structure Parser : PARSER where type Bar = Buffer.Foo)

But with higher-order functors, we would want to do something like this instead:

    functor Server(structure Buffer : BUFFER)(structure Parser : PARSER where type Bar = Buffer.Foo)

Then `Server` could be partially applied. Either way, we are in a small
conundrum because we cannot partially apply `Server` to just the `Parser`
argument. But with HOM, we can at least partially apply it to the `Buffer`
argument. In the first suggested implementation, I think we could perform
partial application with:

    functor Server(X : sig structure Buffer : BUFFER; structure Parser : PARSER end where type X.Buffer.Foo = X.Parser.Bar)
    functor Server1(structure Buffer : BUFFER)(structure Parser : PARSER where Bar = Buffer.Foo) =
      Server(struct structure Buffer = Buffer structure Parser = Parser end)
    functor Server2(structure Parser : Parser)(structure Buffer : BUFFER where Foo = Parser.Bar) =
      Server(struct structure Buffer = Buffer structure Parser = Parser end)

I guess I could try this in SMLNJ and see if it works. I believe that it should.
