# Simulated and Deterministic POSIX Environment

Various thoughts about simulating a POSIX environment (probably just a subset
of POSIX) in a programming language:

1. Should we use the C `int` type for flags, or should we introduce a type
   for flags? POSIX itself doesn't mandate particular values for flags.
2. How could we simulate threading (and mutexes)? This requires a runtime that
   understands what we are doing.
3. If we ignore threading, the simulation could happen entirely as a library.

Let's ignore threading for a moment. We could something like this:

    signature Posix:
      type effect M
      type Flags // In Haskell parlance, Flags has Eq, Semigroup, Monoid instances
      type Fd
      // Flags
      O_RDONLY : Flags
      O_RDWR : Flags
      O_WRONLY : Flags
      O_APPEND : Flags
      O_TRUNC : Flags
      // Functions
      read  : (Fd, Int)      M-> Result Errno Bytes
      write : (Fd, Bytes)    M-> Result Errno () // synchronous write to completion
      open  : (Bytes, Flags) M-> Result Errno Fd

For an application that runs on `x86_64-linux-gnu`, this signature is fulfilled by:

    module Linux:
      type effect M = IO // IO is a builtin type that sequences operations
      type Flags = Int32
      type Fd = Int32
      ... // Other definitions are trivial

But for an application that runs in a sandbox:

    data Filesystem
      = File Bytes // file contents, not the file name
      | Directory (Map Bytes Filesystem)
    data Environment = Environment
      Filesystem // The tree with all the files
      (Map Int64 FileHandleMetadata) // All of the currently open files
    data SandboxFlags = SandboxRdOnly | SandboxRdwr | ...
    module Sandbox:
      type effect M = State Environment
      type Flags = SandboxFlags
      type Fd = Int64
      O_RDONLY : SandboxFlags
      O_RDONLY = SandboxRdOnly
      ... // Other flags are trivial
      read : (Fd,Int) {State Environment}-> Result Errno Bytes
      read (fd,n) = ... // lookup fd in the environment, read bytes from file

To simulate threads, the language needs to support first-class functions
(that can close over their environment) so that the effect system could use
CPS. You'd need a queue of continuations as well as the ability to say
"don't resume this one until this piece of data becomes available".

As an alternative to the "do it in the language approach", we could instead
build a different runtime for simulated POSIX. We would have a different
effect other than `IO`, and then if the `main` function in a program used
this other effect, the program would get run in a different runtime that
dropped all its access to the filesystem and network at start. This approach
would let us simulate threads.

Where does that leave an evaluator/interpreter? One weird thing is that
we end up with two different `Bind` constructs. Or do we? It is not possible
to use both `IO` and the `SimulatedIO` in the same program.
