# Next Level After Monomorphic Language

I have an implementation of a monomorphic language that's not quite done
but has enough in place that the structure of the remaining parts is clear.
I'm thinking about the next language, the one on top of the monomorphic one.
This language should have modules and module functors but not polymorphism.
Modules are not defined recursively, but module components may reference
previously defined module components (with a `self` construct). I've worked
on something very similar on 2023-09-07. Here is the lowering strategy that
I envision:

* There is only a `self` keyword, no `root` keyword.
* There is a stacked context: `[Frame]`, where
  `type Frame = (Map ModId ResolvedModule, Map FunId NewFunId, Map MfId ([Frame],Mf)`
  and `type ResolvedModule = (Map ModId ResolvedModule, Map FunId NewFunId)`.
  Using `self.self.self...` takes you back up through the stack. The resolution
  of a function is an identifier. The resolution of a module includes
  fields that mirror the original structure of the module, but they just
  resolve the identifiers to new identifiers. 
* There are three components. Here is how they are evaluated:
    * Module Functor: Push the unevaluated MF, paired with the context,
      into the current frame.
    * Module: Push another frame onto the context stack. Then start
      evaluating the components of the module. When finished, push this
      resolution onto the original frame. Note: there is no "new module id".
    * Function: Traverse the function body, replacing all references
      to functions by looking them up in the context stack. When complete,
      produce a new function identifier. Push the old-to-new id resolution
      onto the current frame. Additionally, insert the new-id-to-new-body
      mapping into a global function-definition map.
