# Load Compressed Boxed Field from Memory to Register

Goals:

* Pointers are compressed to 32 bits
* The type of the pointer determines the base address
* When we load pointers into registers, we want to turn them
  into something that can be used easily for addressing.

Here's the best solution for x86-64 that I can think of, but
it's not great.

    # r0: The object we are reading from
    # r1: Where we want the address to be
    # FIELD_OFF: offset of our field
    # TYPE_BASE: base address for the type (32-bit number)
    MOV  r1d, [r0 + FIELD_OFF] # load the field, a 32-bit number
    SHL  r1, 35                # move to high bits, padding with three zeros on low end
    OR   r1, TYPE_BASE         # move base address to the low bits (high 3 bits should be zero in TYPE_BASE)
    ROL  r1, 32                # swap the two halves

We do not have to use any spare registers to accomplish this, which is nice.
But it takes three extra instructions just to get a memory address situated.
It feels like there ought to be a better way. Here's a shorter way to do
this that needs a spare reg:

    MOV  r1d, [r0 + FIELD_OFF] # load the field, a 32-bit number
    MOV  r2, TYPE_BASE_64      # move pre-shifted base address to the high bits (low 35 bits are zero)
    LEA  r1, [r2 + r1*8]       # pad with zeros and fill in high bits

That's a little better I guess.

# Thoughts About Shared Representation with 32-bit Numbers

If compressed pointers share a representation with 32-bit numbers, there are
some weird things that happen. In particular, we have two features that are
nice to have on pointers that live in registers:

1. Low three bits are zero
2. High bits have base object loaded in

Of the two of these, the second one is the most important. We can work around
not having the first one easily with x86's addressing. But the second one is
worse because x86 does not support displacements outside of the 32-bit range.

For 32-bit numbers, we would expect that the upper bits are either zero
(for unsigned numbers) or a sign extension (for signed numbers). Functions
that are polymorphic in a 32-bit argument should always have the upper
32 bits zeroed out. When we pass an argument to a polymorphic function,
it's easy to do this since x86 has a bunch of instructions that zero out
the upper 32 bits of a 64-bit register. Dealing with shifting would be
much more of a pain.

So, passing an argument to a polymorphic function is easy. The trickier
part is cleaning up a polymorphic return value. So, for example:

    findValue : (forall a : Ty32). Array a -> a

When we call `findValue`, we might have `a` assigned to:

* `U32`
* `S32`
* `Person`

With `U32`, we don't have to do anything to clean up the result, but
with `S32` we need `MOVSXD` to fill in the upper bits, and with `Person`,
we have to do that sequence from earlier (just like we are loading it
from an object).
