# Primop Variants in an Interpreter

Let's say we have an interpreter with these types of values:

* Big Integer (no overflow)
* Signed and unsigned integers at traditional fixed bit widths (8, 16, 32, 64)
* Boolean
* Objects (ASTs, products, sums)
* Array as a type constructor (e.g. `Array s32`, `Array Object`, `Array (Array u16)`)

We probably ought to throw in other stuff like `Option`, but this is enough to
get things started. Let's consider some primops. We will look at their argument
types and their result type. We do not want the primops to take types as
arguments because the types are implied by the values.

* Add (crash on overflow): any integral type, (i,i) -> i
* Add (wrap on overflow): any integral type, (i,i) -> i
* Index into array: (array e, signed integral type) -> e
* Create array (replicate): (e, signed integral type) -> array e
* Bitwise Complement: unsigned fixed-width word, (w) -> w
* Bitwise And: unsigned fixed-width words, (w,w) -> w
* And: (bool,bool) -> bool
* Upcast: (Width, i1) -> i2 where i1 and i2 have same sign and i2.width >= i1.width
* Downcast (may crash): (Width, i1) -> i2 where i1 and i2 have same sign and i2.width <= i1.width
* UpcastBig: (signed integral type) -> BigInt
* ToSigned: (unsigned) -> signed where width matches
* ToUnsigned: (signed) -> unsigned where width matches

One question is how much overloading should be done. For example, bitwise and
(on words) and logical and (on booleans) are actually kind of similar. We could
collapse these down to a single primop. We probably should. General guiding
principles appear to be:

* Maximize type-directed overloading
* Functions with integral type that appears only in negative position should be
  maximally flexible in what they accept.
* Functions that takes an integral type in both positive and negative positions
  have to constrain more. For example, adding `s16` and `s32` should not be
  allowed because it makes the return type weird. C allows this (even things
  like adding `s16` and `u32`), and it's confusing.
* Bitwise operations should not be used on signed integers or on big integers.
* Keeping signed and unsigned integers separate is preferrable. They are really
  for different purposes. As a concession, `Add`, `Multiply`, and `Divide` work
  on both because they can be useful for both of them. Similarly, upcast and
  downcast work on both.
