# X86 Allocate with Only 2 Registers

Here's the idea. This only works for a single-threaded application:

    # Person: A 16-byte type, values are 16-byte aligned
    # Instruction                Example
    MOV   r0, [rel personMask] # r0: ..._0110_0000 (64 bits in mask)
    TZCNT r1, r0               # r1: 5, sets carry flag when r0 is 0
    JC    .getMoreMemory       # local label that will jump back
    BTR   r0, r1               # r0: ..._0100_0000
    MOV   [rel personMask], r0 # Done with the mask, write it back out
    SHL   r1, 4                # Multiply offset by 16
    ADD   r1, [rel personAddr] # Load person base address and it to offset, user-exposed address in now in r1

To make this work with multithreaded code, we have to make some tweaks:

    MOV   r0, fs:[PERSON_MASK_OFF]
    TZCNT r1, r0
    JC    .getMoreMemory
    BTR   r0, r1
    MOV   fs:[PERSON_MASK_OFF], r0
    SHL   r1, 4
    ADD   r1, fs:[PERSON_MASK_OFF]

The main difference is that rather than doing loads and stores relative to RIP,
we do them relative to FS.

Also, types that have flexible members need to work a little bit differently,
but it should not be particularly bad.

# How to Use Thread-Local Storage

I've done a bit of research on this, and my conclusion is that I should really
use an existing linker. The linker does a lot of work to make TLS happen.
There are two good blog posts about TLS that I found:

* [All about thread-local storage](https://maskray.me/blog/2021-02-14-all-about-thread-local-storage)
* [A Deep Dive into (implicit) Thread Local Storage](https://chao-tic.github.io/blog/2018/12/25/tls)
* [Fuchsia Thread Local Storage](https://fuchsia.dev/fuchsia-src/development/kernel/threads/tls)

One thing that becomes very clear in A Deep Dive is that you really need static
linking for optimal codegen on TLS reads and writes. From the Fuchsia article,
I learned that this codegen model is named "local exec".

Here's a simple C program that reads from thread-local variables:

    int64_t __thread x = 0;
    int64_t __thread y = 0;
    int64_t __thread z = 0;
    
    int64_t addThreadLocalVars(void) {
      int r = x + y + z;
      return r;
    }

And with `objdump -d thread_local_declare.o`:

    thread_local_declare.o:     file format elf64-x86-64
    Disassembly of section .text:
    0000000000000000 <addThreadLocalVars>:
       0:   f3 0f 1e fa             endbr64 
       4:   64 48 8b 04 25 00 00    mov    %fs:0x0,%rax
       b:   00 00 
       d:   64 03 04 25 00 00 00    add    %fs:0x0,%eax
      14:   00 
      15:   64 03 04 25 00 00 00    add    %fs:0x0,%eax
      1c:   00 
      1d:   48 98                   cltq   
      1f:   c3                      ret    

Relocations given by `readelf -r thread_local_declare.o`:

    Relocation section '.rela.text' at offset 0x1e8 contains 3 entries:
      Offset          Info           Type           Sym. Value    Sym. Name + Addend
    000000000009  000500000017 R_X86_64_TPOFF32  0000000000000008 y + 0
    000000000011  000600000017 R_X86_64_TPOFF32  0000000000000010 x + 0
    000000000019  000700000017 R_X86_64_TPOFF32  0000000000000000 z + 0

We can see that the offsets refer to locations where there are four zero
bytes acting as a placeholder. Also, the type is `R_X86_64_TPOFF32`. I've
not been able to find much information about this, but it intuitively makes
sense that thread-local variables would need to be indicated in some special
way. The linker has to hunt them all down to figure out the size of the
TLS block, and I'm guessing that this relocation type is how it accomplishes
that. (But I could be wrong.) At the least, I've found that the
[System V Application Binary Interface](https://refspecs.linuxfoundation.org/elf/x86_64-abi-0.95.pdf)
confirms that `R_X86_64_TPOFF32` is standardized.

Also, here's what the assembly dump of the function looks like:

    addThreadLocalVars:
    .LFB64:
      .cfi_startproc
      endbr64
      mov     rax, QWORD PTR fs:y@tpoff
      add     eax, DWORD PTR fs:x@tpoff
      add     eax, DWORD PTR fs:z@tpoff
      cdqe
      ret
      .cfi_endproc

It look me a while to realize that the at sign (@) doesn't actually have
any special meaning in any flavor of x86-64 assembly. But none of the
symbols `(x|y|z)@tpoff` exist in the output. I think that what's going
on is that GCC doesn't actually use this assembly verbatim. It's
a diagnostic output for the benefit of the user, and it cannot be
compiled with any tool. (I could be wrong though.) But the object file
really *does* have enough information for a linker to work with,
and we can use `ld` to link it with a something else that supplies
a `main` function, and `ld` will make sure that TLS gets set up correctly.

# Conclusions

Even though I don't intend on actually using TLS for some time, I need to
figure out how to generate output that a linker can deal with. There are
several benefits of doing this:

* Easy to set up program entrypoint. Write a C program with `main` that
  sets up the heap and then calls an prototyped entrypoint function.
  I can build the C program a single time and then just invoke the
  linker as needed.
* Relocations. It would be nice to be able to have the linker
  resolve all kinds of symbols for me. To my understanding, linkers
  are not willing to attempt the tricky problem of shrinking down
  an offset to a 1- or 2-byte representation, preferring to represent
  all offsets with 4 bytes. Well, kind of. The linker lets you tell it
  whether the relocated symbol is `R_X86_64_PC32`, `R_X86_64_PC16`, or
  `R_X86_64_PC8`, so if you figure out the right size for everything,
  then the linker will do what you want. But it won't just let you
  put `R_X86_64_PC32` and magically change it to the smallest thing
  possible. Even in spite of this, having something else handle relocations
  for you is nice.
* Possibly reserve address space for the heap with a linker script
* Thread-local storage

