# Dependent Types with Subtyping

Consider this sigma type that bounds integers:

    (x : Int, Conjunction (x >= 0) (x < 100))

We ought to be able to weaken this to any of these:

    (x : Int, x >= 0)
    (x : Int, Conjunction (x >= 0) (x < 200))
    (x : Int, True)

The general rule is that if there is evidence in scope that proposition A
is a subtype of proposition B, then the typechecker should accept `T | A`
where `T | B` is expected. To some extent, subtyping can be automated.
But to what extent? For example, if the typechecker wants to know if

    (n < a) <: (n < a + b)

The answer is yes if `b >= 0` and it's no otherwise. But how much automated
assistence can we get here. We could just prove it by hand:

    ltPlus : n -> a -> b -> (b >= 0) -> ((n < a) <: (n < a + b))
    myFunc =
      case ltPlus x y z of
        Proof -> ... // proof of the subtype is now in scope

But for something like this, maybe the typechecker itself could help
do the work for us. I'm not sure though. There is another slightly
more simple option where we have a primitive for communication "this
is a natural, not just an integer":

    myFunc = withGte0 b theProof ...

And now everything in this context has more subtypes available to it.
It's annoying for the user to have to write this out though. It could
be partially automated. Like it you ever bind an integer with a sigma
type that indicates that it is GTE zero, the compiler automatically
inserts `withGte0` for you. Just an idea. Not sure about it.

I think the real idea here is to try to make sigma types ergonomic,
and part of that involves subtyping. We really need to be able to automatically
provide subtyping relations like this

    Vector (x : Int, x >= 5) <: Vector (x : Int, x >= 0)

Without the user needing to do anything. For this to work right, every type
needs to be a sigma type involving a proposition, and the non-sigma-type
syntax is just sugar for a proposition of `const True`.

Some propositions cannot or should not be expressed this way. For example, we
might need to communicate in a midpoint function that the second argument
is GTE the first argument:

    midpoint : (x : Int) -> (y : Int) -> (y >= x) -> (r : Int, Conjunction (r >= x) (r <= y))

What's tricky here is that we need to talk about just the value, not the
whole (implicit) sigma type when we refer to `x` and `y`. I think this
actually works out fine. Let's try some other examples:

    replicate : (n : Int | n >= 0, n < 2^32) -> a -> (v : Vector a | v.length = n)
    sorted : Vector n a -> Prop
    sort : (n : Int | n >= 0) -> Vector n (Int | r) -> (v : Vector n (Int | r) | sorted v)
    useSorted :
         (n : Int | n >= 0)
      -> (i : Int | i >= 0, i < n)
      -> (j : Int | j >= 0, i < n)
      -> (i <= j)
      -> (v : Vector n a | sorted v)
      -> (index v i <= index v j)

The last function is a more classic DT scenario. We have a function that
returns a proof (only a proof) that relates two values to one another.

There confusing thing about all of this is figuring out when to attach
a predicate to a type (as a sigma type) and when to keep it separate. If the
predicate doesn't capture anything in the environment, then attaching it
is the logical thing to do. In return types, it's the obvious choice since
the return type is freely downgraded if the caller doesn't care about the
refinement. In arguments, it can lead to the cumbersome process of building
a proof of some proposition and then attaching it to the value, but I think
it's the right choice.

Maybe if we lean hard enough into sigma types, we could get some pretty
good automatic subtyping. For example, if we have

    x : Int | x >= a
    y : Int | y >= x

The typechecker ought to be able to use `y` where a value of type

    z : Int | z >= a

is expected. I think that if the refinements are tied directly to the types
rather than just kind of floating around in space, we can get a decent result.
Consider another one:

    x : Int | x >= 0
    y : Int | y >= x + 4

And now further down the typechecker is trying to see if

    (k <= 10) <: (k <= 10 + y)

Clearly, this proposition is true, but should the typechecker be able to
discern this without additional guidance? I think so. Even better would
be if it could detect that

    (k <= 10) <: (k <= 6 + y)

And I think this should be doable. I need to think more about how inequalities
are ordered. I explored this some on 2023-04-26. It seems like a typechecker
could predicably reason that

    x : Int | x >= 0
    y : Int | y >= x + 4
    ==>
    y : Int | y >= x + 4, y >= 4, y >= x

One wrinkle is what happens if we discover halfway through a function that
something is GTE zero. It messes up the subtyping for everything else.
I think this is fine though because we could still use the `withGte0`
strategy.

# Other Kinds of Subtyping

What else might we want:

    (z < sum xs) <: (z < sum (xs ++ ys)) // only on arrays of non-negative integers
    (member e ss) <: (member e (union ss rs))
