# Dependent Types with Levels

An interesting difference between Liquid Haskell (LH) and traditional
dependent types (DT) that I've noticed is the difference in the
type of addition:

    # DT
    plus : Nat -> Nat -> Nat
    # LH
    plus : (a : Int) -> (b : Int) -> {c : Int | c = a + b}

LH distinguishes between the term level and the proof level. That is,
the plus symbol seen in the refinement is really something entirely
distinct from the `plus` function being defined. It must be, because
`plus` cannot reference itself in its own type. I like this system,
but there's nothing that requires LH to use it. It fits into a DT
world as well. Let's try something similar but with more explicit
levels:

    0,1        : Level
    8,16,32,64 : Width
    Int        : Width -> Type 0          # Cannot represent all integers, only value level
    Integer    : (n : Level) -> Type n    # Can represent all integers, term and proof level
    (Integer 0)! ==> Integer 1
    (Int W)!     ==> Integer 1
    42         : Int 64
    42$        : Integer 1                # Lift an integral value to the proof level
    List       : (n : Level) -> Type n -> Type n
    (List{0} A)! ==> List{1} A!
    Cons 42 Nil    : List 0 (Int 64)    : Type0
    (Cons 42 Nil)$ : List 1 (Integer 1) : Type1

The bang operator has an unusual interaction with type constructors. It is
only possible to call bang on a fully applied type constructor, and it
distributes over it. Like this:

      F : n -> Type n -> Type n   A : Type 0
    --------------------------------------------
              (F 0 A)! : F 1 (A!)

I believe the every type constructor ought to work this way. Although
many types live in both levels, some types only exist on a particular
level. But every value-level type can promote to the proof level. It
just looks different for some of them. For example:

* Fixed-width integers are term-level only (promoting to true integers
  at the term level).
* There should be a proof-level type for set that has no true value-level
  equivalent.

Let's look at what some functions might look like:

    length1 : {a : Type 1} -> Array 1 a -> Integer 1
    length0 : {a : Type 0} -> (array : Array 0 a) -> (r : Int 64, Prop (r$ = length1 array!), Prop (r$ >= 0))
    map     : {a : Type 0} -> {b : Type 0} -> (a -> b) -> (arg : Array 0 a) -> (res : Array 0 b, Prop (length1 res$ = length1 arg$))
    filter  : {a : Type 0} -> {b : Type 0} -> (a -> b) -> (arg : Array 0 a) -> (res : Array 0 b, Prop (length1 res$ <= length1 arg$))

How about associating a list with a set?

    Set : Type 1 -> Type 1
    data List = Cons a (List a) | Nil
    elements : List 1 (Integer 1) -> Set (Integer 1)
    elements Nil = empty
    elements (Cons x xs) = union (singleton x) (elements xs)
    insert : {a : Type 0} -> (x : a) -> (arg : List 0 a) -> (res : List 0 a, Prop (elements res$ = union (elements arg$) (singleton a$)))
    insert x xs = (Cons x xs, _)
    eqEmptySubsetOfAnything : {a : Type 1} -> (ys : Set a) -> Prop (ys = empty) -> (xs : Set a) -> Prop (subset ys xs)
    emptySubsetOfAnything : {a : Type 1} -> (xs : Set a) -> Prop (subset empty xs)
    nilElements : {xs : List 1 a} -> xs -> Prop (xs = Nil) -> Prop (elements xs = empty)
    nilWithProof : (x : List 0 a, Prop (x$ = Nil))
    deleteAll : {a : Type 0} -> (x : a) -> (arg : List 0 a) -> (res : List 0 a, Prop (subset (elements res$) (elements arg$)), Prop (not (member x (elements res$))))
    deleteAll x arg = case arg {elements} of
      Nil{_ : Prop (elements arg$ = empty)} ->
        let res, resNil = nilWithProof
        let q : Prop (elements res$ = empty) = nilElements res resNil
        ( res
        , eqEmptySubsetOfAnything (elements res$) q (elements arg$)
        , nonMemberOfEqEmpty x$ (elements res$) q
        )
      Cons{p : Prop (elements arg$ = union (singleton arg$.head) (elements arg$.tail))} ->
        let hd = arg.head
        if x == hd
          then{_ : Prop (x = hd)} => deleteAll ys
          else{q : Prop (x != hd)} =>
            ( Cons y (deleteAll ys)
            , _
            , _
            )

I've omitted some of the parts actually dealing with the proofs because it's
just too exhausting to write it out. Some kind of proof search is needed
to make this more practical.

One possible improvement is to make all value-level types promote cleanly
to proof-level types. All user-defined ADTs are going to promote cleanly,
so why not just have everything promote instead? In particular, this
changes integers a little bit:

    0,1        : Level
    8,16,32,64 : Width
    Int        : (n : Level) -> Width -> Type n   # Cannot represent all integers
    Integer    : (n : Level) -> Type n            # Can represent all integers
    (Integer 0)! ==> Integer 1
    (Int 0 W)!   ==> Integer 1 W
    unbound       : Int 1 w -> Integer 1
    42            : Int 0 64
    42$           : Int 1 64    # Lift an integral value to the proof level
    unbound(42$)  : Integer 1   # Lift an integral value to the proof level
    plus : (a : Int 0 64) -> (b : Int 0 64) -> (c : Int 0 64, Prop (unbound c$ = unbound a$ + unbound b$))

Having to litter `unbound` everywhere is a annoying, but it simplifies
the system a little bit.
