# Uses of File Systems

## Overview

File systems are a part of both the UNIX and the Windows tradition. They are
everywhere, and everywhere they suffers from problems with obscure corner
cases. Issues/features include:

* Symlinks (Plan 9 omits these)
* Text normalization (case folding, unicode composition folding)
* Ownership (permissions)
* Hierarchy (it's a tree)

File systems get used for lots of purposes. Here are some of them:

1. Users storing data files hierarchically
2. In UNIX, configuring an application (typically in `/etc`)
3. Application data not intended to be useful to a user (typically in `/var/lib`)
4. Serving up static assets for websites

## Features

### Textual Names

What is the purpose of a file having a textual name? Why not just have all
files be named by a 128-bit identifier? The textual name is there to help
humans make sense of what is on a file system. Without this property, file
systems would not be immidiately useful for case 1. Textual names drive
the need for some kind of normalization or canonicalization. Even though
UNIX allows `foo.txt` and `Foo.txt` to exist as two discrete files in the
same directory, actually doing this kind of thing is rare. It is rare because
it is confusing to the user.

### Ownership

What is the purpose of the UNIX permissions model? It is to allow fine-grained
control of file access. Unlike textual file names, this is not essential for
almost anything. It's not even a particularly good model for most cases.
It's more common to want to express something like "all of these resources
have access controlled in the same way", and the fine-grained system that UNIX
provides forces us to update permissions in bulk. For example, a user's
"Documents" directory probably does not need a different permission for
everything inside it. The user's intent is probably that all of these files
are accessible to him or her, and that they are inaccessible to everyone else.

### Hierarchy

The hierarchical structure of a file system is, like textual names, really
useful for case 1. It lets us do a bunch of unrelated things. It gives us
namespacing, a way to group things. It works with the permissions model.
With symlinks or even hard links, it lets us alias one part of the file
system in a different place. But let's think about the hierarchy in isolation.
What would it give us if our files didn't have human-readable names, if we
didn't have symlinks, and if there was no permissions model? We could still
use it to group like things. For example, if we had several data files that
were part of the same database, we could store them together. We could
enumerate the directory to say "here are all the data files". But is this
even useful, or would it be better if the structure were flat? A flat structure
would probably be better.

## Ideas

What I envision instead of file systems is a block-device-to-object-store
adapter. The only abstraction this provides is that we get to create files
of an arbitrary size and then refer to them with an identifier. I'll call
this brick storage just to not reuse any existing terms. Here are the features:

* Does not use HTTP like most cloud-oriented object stores
* File names are 128-bit UUIDs
* No hierarchy
* No permissions
* No symlinks
* No growing files
* File contents are arbitrary binary data

The API looks like this:

    // Create a new file. It is filled with zeros. A writeable
    // handle to the file is returned.
    create : (name : U128, size : U64) -> Handle
    // Write to the handle. The handle itself does not track position
    // internally. This application is responsible for this. 
    write  : (h : Handle, position : U64, content : Ptr U8, size : U64) -> ()
    // Copy data from the file to the buffer.
    read   : (h : Handle, position : U64, buffer : Ptr U8, size : U64) -> ()
    // Remove the file
    delete : (name : U128) -> ()

That's basically it. We might want a few variants of read and write that let
us work with a vector of buffers (Linux `readv` and `writev`). We might
want a way to fuse create and write. And we might want a variant of `read`
that allocates the memory for us and returns it into a shared memory.

It's possible to recover some of the other features of a file system by
building on top of this. We can add human-readable names and a hierarchy
by storing some metadata (in a file). Another service could consult that
file and use it to present a hierarchical system to users who need that.

Something that feels important here that I'm starting to see as I'm describing
this is that some kind of partitioning is needed (not in the sense of a
partition table though). Many services will interface with the brick storage
service, and they will not necessarily use it in the same way. For example,
something like Apache Kafka would store large batches of message in some of
the files and have it's own particular metadata for each batch (things like
the leader epoch). But a more human-user-oriented service would implement
a hierarchy with human-readable names on top and would store mime types
and maybe even thumbnail images. These two services do not need to see each
others files. Using partition tables to accomplish this separation is too
heavy handed. Partition tables force the system administrator to decide on
certain disk limits before the system is even used.

What we need instead is some light ability to group files. One simple way
to do this would be to say that the first 32 bits of the UUID is, in some
sense, an owner, and the other 96 bits are the actual ID. Then, with a
capability system, we could grant access to all of an owner's files.
We don't have to do this with a fixed number of bits though. The capability
system could be more general and could grant access based on a prefix.
The "root" capability to the file system would have a zero-length prefix,
and then we could make derived capabilities with longer prefixes.
