# What Are Regions Good For?

There are several ways that a programming language can expose regions
to a user. Here, I'm talking about a very restricted form of regions.
These regions are very first order. No existential quantification and
no storing regions as fields in objects. Regions are not referenced
counted because the end of their lifetime can be determined statically.

So, what kinds of things are these good for? Here is what I have come
up with so far:

* Syntax trees for multi-pass parsing. JSON and Protobuf can both be
  done like this. It is also possible to do skip the syntax tree, but
  doing that requires staged programming or metaprogramming.
* HTTP request parsing in a web framework. It is unlikely that we
  need to reference the request headers (or even the body) after
  we respond to a request.

Here are some problems that I have noticed:

* Let's look at the HTTP example. What if we needed to use one of
  the headers in a request to the database? The header is tied to a region.
  We probably need to put that header into a builder at some point.
  Or maybe not a builder. Maybe it goes into a list of parameters
  for a prepared statement.

Here is a solution I was thinking of. What if we have something not
exactly like existential quantification but that allows us to mix
different regions in a collection. It would look something like this:

    List Person{Region r, Region q, Global}

This is a list of people, where the pointer to each person might be a
pointer to one of three different regions. From the type of the list,
we can see exactly what regions are live at this point in time. But
we do have to somehow tag each stored pointer with its region. So,
the pointers in this list could not be 32-bit pointers. They would
probably require 64 bits. And because of this size difference, there
is no straightforward option for upcasting from

    List Person{Region r} // 32-bit pointers
    ==>
    List Person{Region r, Region q} // 64-bit pointers

The only way to make this work would be to aggresively restrict how many
objects of the same type can live in a region. Maybe the global heap gets
to have 16G, and each region gets 1G, so we could combine up to 16 regions
and the one global heap because hitting our 32G limit. Alternatively, we
could pay a single byte to track the region of every pointer. Typically,
these wouldn't be needed, so they are a slight waste of space, but in
types that are algebraic sums, we already have to use a byte for the tag,
and so we are likely to end up with extra unused space. Only polymorphic
types would end up paying this cost. If the type were monomorphic, the
region would just be locked down to the global heap. So, going back
to the list example, we would end up with:

    -- Reusing a scheme from 2023-07-23
    data Heap = Global | Region RegionVar
    data Allocation = Heap Heap | Stack
    data List a = Cons a (List a) | Nil
    -- A list Foos that may live anywhere (except the stack)
    forall (r : Heap). Concrete List [Concrete Foo [] Immutable {} (Heap r)] Immutable {} Global
    Cons ==> {tag: 8, headheap: 8, head: 32, tail: 32}
    Nil  ==> {tag: 8}

In this example, the spine of the list lives on the global heap. We
could rewrite this to improve it. I need to think harder about that
part. It's not just very ergonomic. Here's a list where the whole thing
lives in the same region:

    Concrete List [Concrete Foo [] Immutable {} (Heap r)] Immutable {} (Heap r)

Some hypothetical syntax for this:

    List Foo{r}
    List{r} Foo{r}
