# Updates to Interior Arrays

What should updates to interior arrays of persistent objects look like?
First, consider ordinary fields: 

    // p1 and p2 of type Person
    p2 = update(p1,age,42)

This suggests that `update` should accept a field as an argument. Now let's
try something with an interior array:

    node2 = update(node1,children,insert(node1.children,0,newChild))

This doesn't really work because `insert` returns a brand new array. We
need `insert` itself to understand that we are creating a new object:

    node2 = objectInsert(node1,children,0,newChild)

This says "make a copy of node1 and modify the children field with insertion
while making the copy". This is not great. What about just requiring all
fields to be initialized explicitly:

    node2 = Person
      { children = insert(node1.children,0,newChild)
      , ... // other fields here
      }

I think this works the best. The RHS of assignment needs to be a little
bit magic. That is, we must recognize that certain primops are allowed
to show up in this position, and that when they are in that position,
they have a different return type. Alternatively, we could have a single
magic operator:

    node2 = Person
      { children = copyIntoField(insert(node1.children,0,newChild))
      , ... // other fields here
      }

But I like being able to have `insert` standalone since it makes it more
clear to the reader of the code what the actual behavior will be. Seen
in this light, the earlier strategy is fine:

    node2 = update(node1,children,insert(node1.children,0,newChild))

Since `update` is a keyword, we can look for `insert` and treat it
specially.
