# Iterating on Type System Again

This borrows ideas from 2023-07-23.md. This time, I am adding representational
widths. These differ from GHC's `RuntimeRep` in that they only communicate the
size of types. The do not answer the question "Should the GHC follow this?".

    Rep = 1 | 8 | 16 | 32 | 64 | 96 | 128 | ... // this is finite
    RepIntegral = Rep | r in {8,16,32,64}
    Type : Rep -> T where
      Integer :
           Signedness
        -> (r : RepIntegral)
        -> IntegralRefinements
        -> Type r
      Boolean : Type 1
      Boxed :
           TypeConstructor
        -> [Rep] -- rep arguments
        -> [exists r. Type r] -- type arguments
        -> Type 32
      Array :
           (r : Rep) -- rep argument
        -> Type r -- type argument
        -> Type 64

In `Boxed`, we are not able to enforce that the type constructor is
applied to the correct types of arguments. We might be able to fix this.
We should probably just do something more simple:

    Type
      Integer :
           Signedness
        -> RepIntegral
        -> IntegralRefinements
        -> Type
      Boolean : Type
      Boxed :
           TypeConstructor -- this includes Array
        -> [Rep] -- rep arguments
        -> [Type] -- type arguments
        -> Type

Then we need to account for regions, mutability, and refinements of
boxed data types:

    Heap = Global | Region RegionVar
    Allocation = Heap Heap | Stack
    Type
      ...
      Boxed :
           TypeConstructor -- this includes Array
        -> [Rep] -- rep arguments
        -> [Type] -- type arguments
        -> Mutability
        -> Allocation
        -> UserDefinedRefinements
        -> Type

We need a way for functions to accept representation width arguments
without monomorphizing. Something like:

    concat : (r : Rep) (a : Type r).
      Array {64} (Array {r} a) -> Array {r} a

Here, we can actually compile a single version of this function. It has
to take the representation width as an argument at runtime. It needs to
occasionally multiply things by that width, but there are basically
just a bunch of `memcpy` calls in a loop with scaled offsets and lengths.

Other functions cannot (or should not) be implemented like this. Consider:

    reverse : Array {r} a -> Array {r} a
    permute : Array 32 S32 -> Array r a -> Array r a

Both of these can technically be implemented in a generic way, but the
generic implementation is terrible. In particular, these both require
working through an array element by element.

So, how do we make some functions get specialized and others not get
specialized? What about a special quantifier:

    forall (r : Rep).
    vs
    forall (r : Rep+).

The second one (with the plus) can be instantiated with a representation
variable, and the first one cannot.

No, that's not the right way. What we should just make it so that certain
primitives require monomorphic rep arguments but only at a certain phase
in compilation. Then this monomorphization requirement would bubble up
into any functions that use those primops.
