# Evaluating Modules

I'm been working on a toy project on and off (called "litheval") that is
an evaluator for an effect-free language with recursive join points but
no first-class functions (no lambda). I've been working on an evaluator
for the module system, and I've run into problems. It's taken me a while
to see where these problems are coming from, so I wanted to write down
what the real issue is.

## Term Language Evaluation

The evaluator for the term language was mostly straightforward. The only
tricky part was figuring out how to support groups of recursive join points.
When defining a join point (or even just lambda), it is necessary to save
a copy of the context at the definition site and then use that context
later when jumping to the join point. So, the context itself ends up
storing join point bodies paired with other contexts. This strategy benefits
enormously from the sharing, so it's nice to use a runtime with a garbage
collector when build this evaluator. To introduce recursive groups, we
need a special context extension construct that indicates that the join
points defined in the group can see the group. The contexts ends up being
a stack (a cons list) of `Assignment`:

    data LabelDefinition = LabelDefinition
      { arguments :: [LocalId] -- arguments
      , body :: Term -- body (arguments in scope here)
      }
    data Assignment
      = AssignmentValue !LocalId !Value
      | AssignmentLabel !LabelId !LabelDefinition
      | AssignmentLabelGroup !(Map LabelId LabelDefinition)

When have a lookup function that works like this:

    lookupLabel ::
         LabelId
      -> [Assignment]
      -> Maybe
           ( LabelDefinition -- the definition
           , [Assignment] -- use this as the base context when evaluating the body
           )

And labels in recursive groups preserve their own group as the head of the
assignments list when they are looked up.

## Diehl's Evaluator

Stephen Diehl has an example of an [evaluator](https://smunix.github.io/dev.stephendiehl.com/fun/005_evaluation.html)
with strict semantics using debruijn indices:

    data Expr
      = Var Int
      | Lam Expr
      | App Expr Expr
      | Lit Int
      | Prim PrimOp Expr Expr
    data PrimOp = Add | Mul
    data Value
      = VInt Int
      | VClosure Expr Env
    type Env = [Value]

    emptyEnv :: Env
    emptyEnv = []

    eval :: Env -> Expr -> Value
    eval env term = case term of
      Var n -> env !! n
      Lam a -> VClosure a env
      App a b ->
        let VClosure c env' = eval env a in
        let v = eval env b in
        eval (v : env') c
      Lit n -> VInt n
      Prim p a b -> (evalPrim p) (eval env a) (eval env b)

    evalPrim :: PrimOp -> Value -> Value -> Value
    evalPrim Add (VInt a) (VInt b) = VInt (a + b)
    evalPrim Mul (VInt a) (VInt b) = VInt (a * b)

## Module Evaluation

What's different about modules? Modules have several interesting features:

* Module functors are a little bit more like lambda than join points are.
  That is, the application context might be totally different from the
  definition context.
* Modules are kind of like records.
* Modules need to make it possible for recursive groups of functions to exist.

Inside a module, we need to be able to reach into itself (before it is finished
being declared) and access functions. This implies that recursion is, to some
extent, supported. What about accessing things from the root of all the modules?
The set of "all modules" is not yet finished being defined, so any kind of
access to a module from the root feels a lot like recursion. Whenever we define
a module functor, we need to be able to say "this is what the context was at
the definition site". Recursion makes this difficult since the module functor
might have in its context things that we have not seen yet.

I'll try to write it out clearly: the problem is that it is impossible (or maybe
just very difficult) to have recursive closures. Having two environments that
reference one another is unintuitive, and I do not know how to represent this.

The solution I'm considering is to adapt what was done for recursive join points.
First, I'm going to try to start with something that doesn't make it possible to
write recursive functions, and then I'll try to remedy that later. Applied to a
module system, the restrictions are expressed as:

* A module can reference itself and any of its parents. It must be possible to
  do this because the parent might be a module functor, and we have to be able
  to access its signatures.
* If a module references itself, at the point of reference, the only visible
  identifiers (functions, other modules) are those define beforehand.
* If a module reference a parent, the only visible identifiers are those
  defined beforehand. This means that, inside of module `foo`, we cannot write
  `self.parent.foo` because `foo` does not yet exist.
* Not sure about starting at the root. I'll worry about that later.

Another way to look at this whole thing is to imagine that what we are doing is
defining all the functions and modules and binding them to identifiers, and
then only at the end do we assemble them into a module.

For each module, we have an environment consisting of a stack of the partially
built parent modules. As we declare functions and modules inside of a module,
the head of the environment grows. When we apply a module functor (represented
by a closure) to a module, we take the module functor's saved environment,
push the module arguments onto it, and then evaluate it, duplicating its
body.

I need to think about this more. I still don't have it totally worked out.

Continuing the next day. When a module functor is declared, there is no
need to evaluate its body immidiately. This is how closures are treated
by Diehl, and it's how I treat join points. Let's consider a module functor
inside of another module functor:

    module mylib
      module ImplA
      module ImplB
      functor X(A)
        function foo(int) => bool
        functor Y(B)
          function bar(int,int) => int { ... self.parent.foo ... }
        module K = self.Y(self.parent.ImplB)
      module J = self.X(self.ImplA)
    function main() { root.mylib.J.K.bar(42,15) }
      
Let's try to evaluate `main` and see what happens. There is always a module 
context that lets you work back up to the root, but you can also start from
the root instead. For things that start with `root`, I'll use the term
"global context" to refer to the context they use for lookups. The global
context does change as we evaluate the program. In the global context, you
can only see top-level modules that have already been completely defined.
That is, from within a module, you cannot access other members from the
root. You just use `self` for this. The "local context" is used when we evaluate
things that begin with `self`. In both the global context and the local context,
definite modules (not module functors) have function and module references in the
form of references to in-memory objects. However, module functors that appear
in the context use named identifiers.

    mylib [{}]
      ImplA [{},{}]
      ImplB [{ImplA},{}]
      X(...) [{ImplB,ImplA},{}] # store as X_env
      J [{X[A,X_env],ImplB,ImplA},{}]
        self.X(self.ImplA) # lookup both X and ImplB in context head
        [ImplA/A]X # Any time we see self.A, replace it with ImplA.
                   # Simultaneously, we must resolve all references,
                   # looking them up in X_env. We can accomplish both
                   # of these goals by just adding the resolved A (which
                   # is ImplA) to X_env
          function foo(...) [{A},{ImplB,ImplA},{}]
          functor Y(...) [{foo,A},{ImplB,ImplA},{}] # store as Y_env
          module K [{Y[B,Y_env],foo,A},{ImplB,ImplA},{}]
            self.Y(self.parent.ImplB) # We find both Y and ImplB where expected
            [ImplB/B]Y
              bar(...) [{B},{foo,A},{ImplB,ImplA},{}]
      End [{J,X[A,X_env],ImplB,ImplA},{}] # just to show final module definition
    main [{mylib}]

This seems like it will work. I do not see a straightforward way to support
general recursion. One problem with this approach is that even extending
it to support recursive functions is difficult. In a functions body, all
references must be resolved, so this will end up creating cyclic data.
We could do a trick and introduce a `recurse` keyword that means "call
the function being declared", but that's not going to be enough to support
mutual recursion.

Why didn't this problem happen with recursive join points? The big difference
here is that the strategy I used for recursive join points didn't resolve
everything all the way down to object references. There was a little more
indirection preserved. Can we do that here? What if functions (but not modules)
received a UUID when they were zapped of relative references? If the UUID was
assigned before zapping, then we could go ahead and add the identifier to the
context. Now, we end up needing to build a map where the keys are the UUIDs,
and the values are all the zapped function and module declarations. But now
we get function recursion.

Can we do this to modules too? What's different? With functions, we can add
many UUIDS to the context upfront and then zap the functions after adding all
the UUIDs. The works because the zapping doesn't cause functions to peek
into the bodies of other functions. The map that resolves UUIDs to the actual
function bodies doesn't need to be updated until after all the functions
are zapped. With modules, we aren't as lucky. In the above example, `J` needs
to inspect the evaluations of `X` and `ImplA`. This is the problem.

Perhaps one way to support recursive modules is to build some understanding
of a suspention into the context. For example, when evaluating `mylib`, we
would start with:

    mylib.Begin [{ImplA=Defer,ImplB=Defer,X(A)=X_body,J=Defer},{mylib=Susp}]

Interestingly, we don't need to defer the module functor. If we start with
`J`, we will get to the reference to `ImplA` and then mark `J` as suspended
(to be able to detect a loop):

    mylib.J [{ImplA=Defer,ImplB=Defer,X(A)=X_body,J=Susp},{mylib=Susp}]
      mylib.ImplA [{ImplA=Susp,ImplB=Defer,X(A)=X_body,J=Susp},{mylib=Susp}]
    mylib.J [{ImplA=Id ...,ImplB=Defer,X(A)=X_body,J=Susp},{mylib=Susp}]

And now we can finish `J`. This lets us deal with modules that are out of
order, but it doesn't actually give us any of the expressive power of
recursive modules. Consider:

    # Suppose we have an AST that is polymorphic in the element.
    # We can set the element type to itself to make the AST recursive.
    functor ShowAst(s)
      show(ast) { ... } # implementation applies s.show at certain leaves
    module ShowAnf
      show(atom) { ... } # show things allowed in A-Normal Form (non recursive)
    module ShowStd
      show(ast) { self.parent.std.show(ast) } # show terms that allow other terms at leaves
    module anf = ShowAst(ShowAnf)
    module std = ShowAst(ShowStd)

Evaluating `anf` will work because `ShowAnf` does not use recursion. But
evaluating `std` will cause problems:

    std [{ShowAst(),ShowAnf=Id ...,ShowStd=Defer,anf=Id ...,std=Susp}]
      ShowStd [{ShowAst(),ShowAnf=Id ...,ShowStd=Susp,anf=Id ...,std=Susp}]
        # Here, we may assign show (and anything other function in ShowStd) an id
        # before evaluating it.
        show [{show=Id ...},{ShowAst(),ShowAnf=Id ...,ShowStd=Susp,anf=Id ...,std=Susp}]
          self.parent.std.show # looked up something suspended. loop detected.

What we want is for this last `show` to see enough of the structure of `std` that it
can proceed. How could this be possible? We could resolve `std` a little bit. Let's
go back to the beginning of the evalution. What if we start by looking at `ShowAst`
instead of `ShowStd`:

    std [{ShowAst(),ShowAnf=...,ShowStd=Defer,anf=...,std={show=X}}] # placeholder X, not sure what goes here
      ShowStd [{ShowAst(),ShowAnf=Id ...,ShowStd=Susp,anf=Id ...,std={show=X}}]
        show [{show=Id ...},{ShowAst(),ShowAnf=Id ...,ShowStd=Susp,anf=Id ...,std={show=X}}]
          self.parent.std.show # looked up X

But what is X? It must be some kind of closure. Something that means "when you
figure out what `ShowAst(ShowStd).show` is, put that here. Intuitively, we
can see what it is, but I don't know how to make a program be able to figure
that out. I think it's probably just better to abandon this for now.

UUIDs for functions and object references for modules. 
