# Top Level Modules, Packages, Organizations

Most languages distinguish between modules and packages. This is necessary
because packages are something that a build tool needs to collect and
get into place for you. Without packages, you would need to just copy
all your dependencies into your project.

But, packages are similar to modules. After a tool has gathered them
all and gotten them into place on your file system, could we then
start thinking about them as modules? I'm going to include organizations
(defined by domain names) as well because I think a single global package
repository with one namespace for all packages is not great:

    module core.example.com // organization
      module stdlib
        module Array
          function replicate()
          function insert()
        module Posix
          type FileDescriptor
          module File
            function open()
            function close()
          module Socket
            function connect()
            function accept()
    module drewleetcode.example.com // organization
      module helperlib
        function exponentiate()
    main()

So, at the very top level, we end up with modules that are domain names.
The very last thing we have, for applications, is an entrypoint (a `main`
function). We don't really have to have the org/package thing everywhere.
If it's a library that is being redistributed, then yes, it needs to be
there. But lets say someone is working on an application, and it includes
an application, a test suite, and some shared code between them. That
might look like this:

  module mysharedcode
    function exponentiate()
  module application
    function main()
  module testsuite
    function main()

We cannot have `main` at the top level, and the build tool needs to give
us a way to choose an entrypoint.

One important difference between org/package modules and regular ones is that
packages (and organizations) cannot be defined recursively. Packages
dependencies have to form a DAG.

# Recursive Modules

Revisiting something from 2023-08-01:

    module type ParamType = sig
      type element
    end
    module MySyntaxTree (M : ParamType) = struct
      type ast
        = Lit Int
        | App M.element (List element)
    end
    x = MySyntaxTree(struct {type element = x.ast})

I think this should be admissible. The only important trick is that we need
to be able to do forward declarations of module types for things like this.
(For functions, this is already good practice and mandatory in many languages.)
That is, we just need to add

    x : module{type ast}

before defining `x`, and then it should all work out fine. What about
infinitely recursive types?

    module type ParamType = sig
      type element
    end
    module MySyntaxTree (M : ParamType) = struct
      type ast = element
    end
    x = MySyntaxTree(struct {type element = x.ast})

Here, we end up with `x.ast = x.ast`. Is this a problem? I'm not sure. The
type is completely unusable. I think that a type defined as itself is
nearly the same thing as GHC's `Void` type in that it has no inhabitants.
It's possible that the definition

    type R = R

Could be replaced by

    data R // this type has no no data constructors
