# Lith-Eval Experiment

## Contexts for Join Points 

This continues a thought from 2023-08-07. To handle recursive join points,
I ended up making a context type that looks like this:

    data LabelDefinition e = LabelDefinition
      { arguments :: [LocalId] -- arguments
      , body :: Term e -- body (arguments in scope here)
      }
    data Assignment e
      = AssignmentValue !LocalId !Value
      | AssignmentLabel !LabelId !(LabelDefinition e)
      | AssignmentLabelGroup !(Map LabelId (LabelDefinition e))
    type Context e = [Assignment e]

Every non-recursive join point has everything (join points and value binders)
that came before it in scope, and recursive join points all that plus their
entire group in scope. This system works out nicely. We do end up performing
an expensive scan to search for binders, but it is simple.

## Getting Rid of GADT

I've been tracking effectfulness with a GADT, but I think it would be nice
to stop doing this. Here is what I have now (some data constructors have
been removed for clarity):

    data Term :: Effectfulness -> Type where
      Local :: LocalId -> Term 'Uneffectful
      Lift :: Value -> Term 'Uneffectful
      Apply :: SingEffectfulness e -> FunctionId -> [Term 'Uneffectful] -> Term e
      ApplyPrim :: PrimOp e -> [Term 'Uneffectful] -> Term e
      Let :: Binding e1 e2 -> LocalId -> Term e1 -> Term e2 -> Term e2
      Pure :: Term 'Uneffectful -> Term 'Effectful
      Project :: Term 'Uneffectful -> FieldId -> Term 'Uneffectful
      CaseBool ::
           Term 'Uneffectful -- scrutinee
        -> Term e -- true case
        -> Term e -- false case
        -> Term e

So currently, it's not even possible to construct a term that composes
effectful and uneffectful terms incorrectly. I think it's possible to
stop doing this with the type system and do the tracking in the evaluator
instead. The trick would be, at each step in the evaluator, to have a
flag that means "are we performing an effectful computation right now". And
this needs to come in from the very top. Any function declaration would
need to clarify its effectfulness. When we recurse to evaluate something
that is expected to be uneffectful (e.g. `Project`, argument lists), we
just pass `Uneffectful` to `evaluate`. If we call `Pure` in an uneffectful
context, it's an error. I do still want the explicit lifting that `Pure`
gives us, which should seldom be necessary. In this new system, `Apply`
and `ApplyPrim` just need to check that the expected effectfulness mandated
by the context matches the effectfulness of the function. `Let` is kind
of a pain. I'd like to get rid of the `Binding` type if possible. If we
are in an uneffectful context, it's simple: both the bound term and the
term in which the binder is available must be uneffectful. If we are in
an effectful context, the bound term is really allowed to be either, but
we need to know which effectfulness we expect before we try to evaluate
it. We could split `Let` into `Let` and `Bind`, where `Let` handles the
uneffectful-uneffectful case and the uneffectful-effectful case, and
`Bind` handles the effectful-effectful case. This seems promising.
