# More Thoughts About Monads Without First-Class Functions

Continuing from 2023-11-05. The most promising idea was:

    signature Monad
      Environment : * -> *
      State       : * -> *
      Result      : * -> *
      bind        : (Environment (State a) -> Result (State b), Environment (Result (State a))) -> Result (State b)

With this, we can write

    module functor ReaderMonad(env : *) : Monad
      Environment = Pair e
      State = Identity
      Result = Identity
      bind : (Pair e a -> b, Pair e a) -> b
      bind (f,x) = f x
    module functor StateMonad(s : *) : Monad
      Environment = Identity
      State = Pair s
      Result = Identity
      bind : (Pair s a -> Pair s b, Pair e a) -> Pair s b
      bind (f,x) = f x
    module functor ResultMonad(e : *) : Monad
      Environment = Identity
      State = Identity
      Result = Either e
      bind : (a -> Result e b, Result e a) -> Result e b
      bind (f,r) = case r of
        Success a -> f a
        Failure e -> Failure e

Can we implement traverse?

    traverseList : Monad m
      => (m.Environment (M.State a) -> m.Result (m.State b))
      -> m.Environment (m.Result (m.State (List a)))
      -> m.Result (m.State (List b))
    traverseList {m f} xsArg = m.bind
      (\xs -> ...
      ) xsArg

No! We still cannot implement traverse. We need a way to access the List
wrapped inside of the state and the environment:

    signature Monad
      Environment : * -> *
      State       : * -> *
      Result      : * -> *
      bind        : (Environment (State a) -> Result (State b), Environment (Result (State a))) -> Result (State b)
      openEnv       : Environment a -> (a, Environment Unit)
      openState     : State a -> (a, State Unit)
      openEnvState  : Environment (State a) -> (Environment Unit, State Unit, a)
      closeEnv      : (a, Environment Unit) -> Environment a
      closeState    : (a, State Unit) -> State a
      closeEnvState : (Environment Unit, State Unit, a) -> Environment (State a)
      pureResult    : a -> Result a

Lets try again:

    traverseList : Monad m
      => (m.Environment (M.State a) -> m.Result (m.State b))
      -> m.Environment (m.Result (m.State (List a))) // probably should remove Result from this type
      -> m.Result (m.State (List b))
    traverseList {m f} xsArg = m.bind
      (\xsWrapped -> case m.openEnvState xsWrapped of
        (env,st,xs) -> case xs of
          Nil -> m.pureResult(m.closeState(Nil,st))
          Cons y ys -> m.bind
            (\y' -> m.bind (\ys' -> ...) (...))
            (closeEnv (f (m.closeEnvState (env,st,y)), env))
      ) xsArg

I've left some holes in there, but it looks like this does work. It's terrible
though (but it might be good enough). The issue is that we are saying that
Monad means RWST, and we are just defining functions on RWST. Using HKT in
the signature means that we do not have to have a bunch of useless `Pair Unit`
and `Either Void` clogging up our functions when we are not using the monadic
interface. Also, using HKT like this means we can make monad-generic functions
have nice signatures:

    (a {m.M}-> b) = (m.Environment (M.State a) {m.M}-> m.Result (m.State b))
    traverseList : Monad m
      => (a {m.M}-> b) -> (List a {m.M}-> List b)

Two remaining questions: effectfulness and linearity. To deal with effectfulness,
we can just make two copies of every monadic function. It's not pretty, but it
works. Linearity is trickier. All of the monads we support are linear in their
argument. (We do not support a monadic interface to List.) We need to be able
to capture this:

    signature Monad
      Environment   : forall (u : Uniqueness). Type u -> Type u
      State         : forall (u : Uniqueness). Type u -> Type u
      Result        : forall (u : Uniqueness). Type u -> Type u
      openEnv       : forall (u : Uniqueness) (a : Type u). Environment a -> (a, Environment Unit)
      closeEnv      : forall (u : Uniqueness) (a : Type u). (a, Environment Unit) -> Environment a
      ... all the other functions

I do not want to have to support uniqueness polymorphism. However, we really
need to be able to allocate a mutable array in a monadic context and use it
safely. But the typechecker must not allow closures to close over unique values
unless we can also guarantee that the closure is only entered once. We know
that all of these monadic types works this way, but the typechecker does not.
I'm beginning to think that using the module system is not a good idea. It will
probably be better to introduce Monadic arrows as a construct that the type
system can reason about, and then these can be specialized during compilation.
Do users actually need to be able to define their own monadic arrow types,
or can we just close this off? What if we have something like:

    data Effect = Reader Type | State Type | Exception Type | IO
    EffectsToFunction : [Effect] -> Function

And then we have something like:

    module MyParser
      effect M = [Reader ByteArray, State Int, Exception String]
      function type Parser a b = (ByteArray, Int, a) -> Exception String (Int, b)
      assert Parser = EffectsToFunction M
