# A Different Way to Think About Pointers

I have been thinking about how to support a `Ptr` (pointer) type for
a while now. There are some GC-related difficulties when we do the
naive thing:

* It is difficult to find the full type of the object that a pointer
  belongs to.
* Uniqueness types starts to fall apart when we initialize a data
  constructor to writing to an interior pointer. We have no way to
  recover the pointer.

I thought of a weird system that resolves both of these problems.
Here are its features:

1. The `Ptr` type only refers to immutable data. It is a binary
   type constructor that takes both the base object type and the
   element type as its arguments.
2. Writes are done directly to mutable objects without casting
   them to pointers. Fortunately, x86 has an addressing mode that
   makes this easy (we can do `[base + fieldOffset + ix]`). However,
   ARM has a more difficult time with this construct.

Here are some examples:

    lookupPtr : Map a -> Key -> Option (Ptr (MapNode a) a)
    dereference : Ptr t a -> a
    write[name] : Foo* -> Text -> Foo*
    write[age] : Foo* -> Int -> Foo*
    write[children] : Foo* -> Int -> Node -> Foo* -- takes an index
    myFoo.name : Text
    myFoo.age : Int
    myFoo.children : Ptr Foo Node

There might be a way to borrow a mutable pointer from a an object with
this scheme. In theory, we could have:

    restore : Ptr* t a -> t*

But the actual implementation of this would be a little complicated.
Since the pointer could be at any position in an array, we would need
to work backwards from the pointer. This could happen several different
ways:

1. Easy: The type `t` is known, and the type has a fixed size (no flexible
   members). In this case, we use the `t` to round downward.
2. Hard: The type `t` is known, and the type has a flexible member
   (size is not fixed). We have to consult a source of information
   at runtime to find the size. We find this by truncating the pointer
   and using it as a lookup into something else.
3. Hard. The type `t` is unknown. Same as before.

Option (2) is weird, and it is not something people expect to happen, but
I think that it is sound.
