# A Finite Number of Runtime Representations

Suppose that we have a small number of runtime representations:

    -- Number of bytes needed to represent type
    data Width = W1 | W2 | W4 | W8

And maybe a few others (at the least, `W12`, `W16`, `W32`, and `W48`
would be useful). The exact widths are not important, just that there
is a small number of them. And then we have:

    Type : Width -> *
    Word8 : Type W1
    Word16 : Type W2
    Word32 : Type W4
    Word64 : Type W8
    Person : Type W4
    Dog : Type W4

Let's say that a user defines a data type:

    data Tree a = Branch (Tree a) (Tree a) | Leaf a

Under the hood, we need the type constructor `Tree` to have this
slightly dependent type:

    Tree : (w : Width) -> Type w -> Type W4

Since `Width` has a finite number of inhabitants, we can specialize `Tree`:

    Tree W1 : Type W1 -> Type W4
    Tree W2 : Type W2 -> Type W4
    Tree W4 : Type W4 -> Type W4
    Tree W8 : Type W8 -> Type W4

Similarly, we can specialize all functions that operate on a `Tree`:

    height : (w : Width) -> (a : Type w) -> Tree w a -> Word64
    height W1 : (a : Type W1) -> Tree W1 a -> Word64
    height W2 : (a : Type W2) -> Tree W2 a -> Word64
    ... etc.

# How to Expose to End User

How should this be exposed to the end user? We do not want users to have
to deal with runtime representations explicitly since these make type
signatures more complicated. Perhaps every `forall` could introduce
two variables, one of which is hidden:

    User writes:
    height : forall (a : Ty). Tree a -> Word64
    Compiler sees:
    height : forall (w : Width, a : Type w). Tree_ w a -> Word64

That seems kind of goofy though. I think that we might be able to add
the `Width` information when lowering instead. Then we could avoid
this mess.

# Compilation Stages

When should this specialization happen? Probably early because we want
to do it *before* lowering the `foreach` construct. We want to do it
then so that we can choose SIMD primitives of the right size. Let's
see how `Tree` might get lowered:

    User Writes:
    data Tree : Ty -> Ty
    Compiler Creates:
    data Tree[W1] : Type W1 -> Type W4
    data Tree[W2] : Type W2 -> Type W4
    ... etc.

And for `height`, we have:

    User Writes:
    height : forall (a : Ty). Tree a -> Word64
    Compiler Creates:
    height[W1] : forall (a : Type W1). Tree[W1] a -> Word64
    height[W2] : forall (a : Type W2). Tree[W2] a -> Word64
    ... etc.

This seems pretty simple. I think that it should be possible to make this work.
