# Actions a Kafka Consumer Takes

Before a Kafka consumer starts processing logs, it has to go through a
sequence of actions to figure out which broker it will receive instructions
from and which which brokers any relevant partitions are on. In this post,
I describe what this process looks like for a consumer that participates
in a consumer group and consumes a single partition of a single topic.
The consumer may end up connecting to at most three different brokers.
Here are the steps:

* Bootstrap Server
    * Connect to the bootstrap server
    * Make ApiVersions request and confirm sufficient version support
    * Make Metadata request to find all brokers and any relevant topics.
      The response tells us which broker hosts each partition. We use
      this information later when we actually start consuming records
      from a broker.
    * Make FindCoordinator request to locate the broker that serves as
      the consumer group coordinator.
    * Possibly shut down this connection. Or it can be reused if the
      coordinator happens to be the broker that we are already connected to.
* Coordinator
    * Connect to the coordinator (may be able to skip this)
    * Make ApiVersions request (may be able to skip this)
    * Make JoinGroup request. This probably has to be done twice.
      The first time, the coordinator assigns a group member id
      (not a group instance id, which is used for static membership)
      and responds with error code `MEMBER_ID_REQUIRED`. The second time,
      the consumer joins the group with the member id that the coordinator
      assigned it. There is a field named `members` in a join group response.
      If this field is populated, it implies that the consumer that received
      the response was chosen by the coordinator as the group leader.
    * Make SyncGroup request. If you are a follower, this is used to
      learn what you will be consuming. If you are a leader, this is
      used to make all of the assignments.
    * Make OffsetsFetch request. This tells us what offsets the consumer
      group is currently positioned at. This does not need to be performed
      for an earliest/latest consumer.
* Consmuption
    * Connect to the broker that hosts the partition that you are
      consuming. (may be able to skip this)
    * Make ApiVersions request (may be able to skip this)
    * Make ListOffsets request. This lets us know if the consumer group
      is positioned at an offset that no longer exists (aged out). If
      we are doing an earliest/latest consumer, this lets us figure
      out where we are starting.
    * Make Fetch requests. Do this over and over to get more data. One weird
      thing about this is that it's kind of stateful. On the very first
      request, we set the session id to zero to request that the broker
      assign us a session id. On subsequent requests, we can omit the topics
      list to mean "do the same fetch I tried most recently". We only
      do this when the previous fetch returned no records. If there were
      records, we just provide the list of partitions (just one partition
      in this scenario) to update the offset that we want to fetch.
    * Eventually, make OffsetCommit request. I've not done this one yet,
      but the way it should work seems clear. 
    * Make LeaveGroup request. This is optional, but if you do it before
      exiting, you don't have to wait for the group coordinater to evict
      the no-longer-running member from the group.

There's other stuff you can do that I've not needed yet. For example, the
Heartbeat request let's you communicate to the coordinator that a member
is still alive even though it's not consuming any records. This is probably
useful when the consumer is feeding the records into something that has
really high latency (greater than 10s). But I don't push data into anything
with terrible latency, so I don't actually need Heartbeat request.
