# Monads Without First-Class Functions

I don't like functions as first-class values. When I see a value type `Foo`,
I want to know that it is fully evaluated data all the way down and that
it doesn't contain any closures. This makes things difficult when trying
to write code that works in any monadic context. The problem is that we
need some kind other than `*`. We have to be able to talk about functions
types somewhat generically.

    Foo : *
    ExceptArrow : Function
    ReaderArrow : Function
    StateArrow : Function
    App : (arrow : Function, Function, a) -> b

If something is of kind `Function`, it is implied that it can be applied
to an argument of any type and returns

Here is another thought. What if we just parameterized the input and the output
by a functor (a Haskell-style functor).

    f a -> g b

Various combinations of `f` and `g` let us recover different monads:

* Reader: `f ~ Pair, g ~ Identity`
* Except: `f ~ Identity, g ~ Either`
* State: `f ~ Pair, g ~ Pair where f.0 = g.0`

Dealing with effectfulness requires something outside of this, so the whole
system would end up looking like this:

    module functor Monad(Argument : * -> *, Result : * -> *, Eff : Effectfulness, resultToArgument : Result a -> Argument a)
      bind : (Argument a ->{Eff} Result b, Argument b ->{Eff} Result c, Argument a) ->{Eff} Result c
      bind = ...

But this does not work because it is not possible to write `resultToArgument`
for `Except`-style monads. The whole thing needs to be a signature instead:

    signature Monad
      Argument : * -> *
      Result   : * -> *
      Eff      : Effectfulness
      bind     : (Argument a ->{Eff} Result b, Argument b ->{Eff} Result c, Argument a) ->{Eff} Result c

What about effectfulness. All monads that I am interested in can operate in
either an effectful context or a noneffectful context. Perhaps we could have:

    signature Monad
      Argument : * -> *
      Result   : * -> *
      bindEff  : (Argument a ->! Result b, Argument b ->! Result c, Argument a) ->! Result c
      bindPure : (Argument a -> Result b,  Argument b -> Result c,  Argument a) ->  Result c

Now we can implement reader:

    data Pair a b = Pair a b
    functor Reader(env : *) : Monad
      type Argument = Pair env
      type Result = Identity // note: identity is magic. It's like a GHC type family
      bindPure(f,g,Pair e a) = g Pair e (f (Pair e a)))
      bindEff(f,g,Pair e a) = do
        b <- f (Pair e a)
        c <- g (Pair e b)
        pure c

Let's try state:

    functor State(s : *) : Monad
      type Argument = Pair s
      type Result = Pair s
      bindPure(f,g,Pair s0 a) = case f (Pair s0 a) of
        Pair s1 b -> g s1 b
      bindEff(f,g,Pair s0 a) = ...

What happens where a user exposes a monadic interface to a parser?

    data ParserArgument a = ParserArgument
      { bytes : Array U8
      , position : Int
      , argument : a 
      }
    data ParserResult a
      = ParserResultSuccess { position : Int, result : a }
      | ParserResultFailure String
    module Parser
      type Argument = ParserArgument
      type Result = ParserResult
      bindPure : (ParserArgument a -> ParserResult b, ParserArgument b -> ParserResult c, ParserArgument a) -> ParserResult c
      match : ParserArgument U8 -> ParserResult Unit
      any   : ParserArgument Unit -> ParserResult U8

What has happened is that, instead of put some kind of monad annotation on
the arrow, we have put an annotation on the argument and result types. Also,
I think I've made it too complicated. I think we can make it more like it
looks in Haskell:

    // Nevermind, this does not work.
    signature Monad
      Argument    : * -> *
      Result      : * -> *
      bind        : (Argument Unit -> a -> Result b, Result (Argument a)) -> Result b
    module functor Reader(e : *)
      Argument = Pair e
      Result = Identity
      bind (f,Pair e a) = f (Pair e a)
    module functor State(s : *)
      Argument = Pair s
      Result = Identity
      bind (f,Unit,Pair s0 a) = f Unit a

Let's see what monadic traversal of a list would look like:

    // Ignore this, could not make it work
    traverseList : Monad m => (m.Argument a -> m.Result b) -> m.Argument (List a) -> m.Result (List b)
    traverseList {m f} xsArg = m.bindPure
      (\xs -> case xs of
        Nil -> m.pure Nil
        Cons y ys -> m.bindPure
          (traverseList{m f} ys, 
      ) xsArg

Actually, I cannot really get any of this to work well. This only thing that
seems like it actually works is to explicitly capture different parts of an
RWST monad:

    signature Monad
      Environment : *
      State       : *
      Result      : * -> *
      bind        : ((Environment,State,a) -> Result (State, b), Environment, State, Result a) -> Result (State, b)

The result part is kind of different, but it makes it possible to avoid dealing
with failure in all the monads that do not need it. We could instead do this:

    signature Monad
      Environment : * -> *
      State       : * -> *
      Result      : * -> *
      bind        : (Environment (State a) -> Result (State b), Environment (Result (State a))) -> Result (State b)

Another way to think about this is by just defining `bind` instead:

    bind : (env, state, (err | a))
        -> ((env, state, a) -> (err | (state, b)))
        -> (err | (state, b))
