# Subtyping for Tracking Array Length

The way I've always thought about tracking array length is to use existential
quantification to hide it when it's not needed. You end up with:

    myArray1 : Array 20 Int          // array of 20 integers
    myArray2 : exists n. Array n Int // array of unknown number of integers

But the story around casting is strange for this. I noticed yesterday that
subtyping can produce a similar effect:

    ArrayOf : Nat -> * -> *
    Array   :        * -> *
    forall (n : Nat). ArrayOf n <: Array : * -> *

If we have a value of type `ArrayOf 5 Int`, we may also use it as an
`Array Int`. We need some kind of construct for recovering the length:

    let (n : Nat, arr2 : Array n X) = recoverLength (arr1 : Array X)

As an implementation detail, `arr2` aliases `arr1`.

# Things I Am Trying to Figure Out

Sometimes, it is useful to parameterize an entire struct by a type
variable. For example:

    forall (e : *). structure EitherMonad where
      type M = Either e : * -> *
      bind : M a -> (a -> M b) -> M b
      pure : a -> M a

The classic SML solution to this is to break Either up like this:

    functor EitherMonadFn (e : *) where ...

Actually, maybe this is fine. Let's try it with arrays of known length:

    functor ArrayFunctorFn (n : Nat) where
      type M = ArrayOf n : * -> *
      map : (a -> b) -> ArrayOf n a -> ArrayOf n b

The problems is that we might need to instantiate ArrayFunctor with a natural
that is not known until runtime:

    foo(myArray : Array Int) where
      n,myArrayN = recoverLength myArray
      inst = ArrayFunctorFn(n)
      otherArray = inst.map(... , myArrayN)
      ...

I think that this is probably just not a useful thing to try to do. What
exactly is the goal? There are several things that would be nice to have.
It is nice to be able to traverse an array of known length and have a
guarantee of length preservation:

    traverseArray : (a ->{m} b, ArrayOf n a) ->{m} ArrayOf n b

But we don't need to do anything with modules to get this function. We can
just have it available monomorphically. I think I'm worried about some kind
of situation where we have something that operates generically over any
traversable type, and then if we instantiate it to use Array, we want to
have types that give us nice guarantees about the length. But the need for
this does not actually feel common.

Back to the array example, what if we have some function that uses Either
whose left type is free, and we want to use the monadic interface:

    parseThing : e -> [Byte] -> Either e Person
    parseThing err bytes = ... // we cannot apply EitherMonadFn here

This is annoying. The only way that we can use Either's monadic interface
here is if we put this function inside a module functor. Effectively:

    parseThing : forall (e : *).
      (m : Monad | m.M = Either e) -> e -> [Byte] -> Either e Person
    parseThing err bytes = ... // we may use m here

This is silly though. We end up with the same problem basically every time
a free type variable shows up. Consider a map whose key has a phantom type:

    signature Ord where
      T : *
      lt : T -> T -> Bool
      eq : T -> T -> Bool
    functor Map (ord : Ordering) where
      Key = ord.T
      C : * -> * = ...
      insert : Key -> a -> C a -> C a
    type Foo : * -> *
    functor FooOrd (a : *) where
      T = Foo a
      lt = ...
      eq = ...
    fooIntOrd = FooOrd(Int)
    fooBoolOrd = FooOrd(Bool)
    fooIntMap = Map(fooIntOrd)
    fooBoolMap = Map(fooBoolOrd)

The type argument to `Foo` is phantom, but we have to instantiate the modules
for all values that the argument takes. Preferable would be this:

    fooMap : (x : *) -> structure{...}

And we could instantiate `fooMap` with any time, even inside function bodies.
I'm not sure how important it is to be able to do this, but it feels useful
to me.

OCaml has a `Monad2` which looks like this:

    signature Monad2 where
      type M = * -> * -> *
      bind : M e a -> (a -> M e b) -> M e b
      pure : a -> M e a

And we can recover a `Monad` with:

    functor LowerMonad2 (m : Monad2, e : *) : Monad where
      type M = m.M e
      bind = m.bind
      pure = m.pure

That's the OCaml solution. But still, I would prefer doing something like this:

    data State : (* -> * -> *) = ...
    module forall (e : *). StateFunctor where
      type M = State e
    stateFunctorUtils[e] = FunctorUtils(StateFunctor[e])

Hmmm... This doesn't feel great. What about a different way of consuming modules:

    when : (m : Monad) => Bool -> m.M Unit -> m.M Unit
    
Now we can write:

    when{StateFunctor[e]}(myBool,action)

This feels palatable. Let's see what a traversal looks like:

    traverse : (t : Traversable, m : Monad)
      => (a -> m.M b) -> t.T a -> m.M (t.T b)

And we can use it like this:

    traverse{EitherTraversable[e],IoMonad}(transformVal, myEither)
