# Integer Compression, Again

I wrote about a novel integer-compression scheme on 2023-03-22. Today,
I'm writing about another scheme with different design goals:

* This scheme prioritizes compression ratio more than the earlier one.
* This scheme is not amenable to in-place SIMD operations (like the
  earlier one was).

Let's call this scheme Tripack. I'll describe decompression first,
since it's more simple. Essentially, we decompress three different
sources of integers into 64-element vectors and then take the vector
sum to get the result. The three sources are:

1. Deltas. The deltas are encoded with either 0, 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, or 64
   bits. Each delta uses the same number of bits. We only support sizes
   that are easy to use. We might be able to support 24, 40, 48, and 56
   as well. If the size of deltas is 0, then this array takes no space.
2. Global dictionary. A dictionary that is applied at all positions.
   The dictionary has 0, 2, 4, or 16 elements. These elements should
   probably be flit encoded. For each of the 64 elements in the array,
   we store an index into the dictionary. Each index is represented
   by 0, 1, 2, or 4 bits depending on how many elements were in the
   dictionary.
3. Patching. An array of up to 64 index-integer pairs. This are encoded
   with flit and consequently must be in the 64-bit signed range.

As a final source, we can have a fourth array of index-integer pairs
for big integers (outside of the 64-bit signed range). These are not
be summed with the other components and are essentially ineligible
for compression.

One other useful trick is to look for an integer that divides evenly
into most of the elements. This is often useful when the elements
represent some kind of measurement, and a low-precision variant
(e.g. milliseconds) has been converted to a high-precision variant
(e.g. nanosecends) somewhere in the pipeline. I think it makes the most
sense to apply the scaling factor between steps 1 and 2.

As an example, let's say we have an array of destination ports from
a firewall. This is commonly dominated by http traffic. Let's say the
distribution of these value is:

* 443 (https): 40 of these
* 80 (http): 22 of these
* 25 (smtp): 2 of these

How could we compress this:

Deltas: 0 bits. Global dict: 1 bit (64 bits of selections). Global
dict elements: 80 (1 byte), 443 (2 bytes). Local dict: -55, -55 (both
1 byte, plus 1 byte for positions). Total size of
payloads: 8 + 1 + 2 + 4 = 15 bytes. This does not account for metadata,
like representing the fact that we are using 0 bits for deltas and 1 bit
for the global dict.
