# How to Represent HTML

I don't think that HTML needs to be a builtin type in a programming language.
It's representation should be exposed to the end user. HTML that is being built
and HTML that has been parsed (and is being analyzed) probably need different
representations. Abstractly:

    type OrderedMapTextKey : * -> *
    functor HtmlStuff
      ( sig
        { type Collection : * -> *    // Array or builder
        , type AttributeMap : * -> *
        , type Text : *               // Array-like text or builder-like text
        , type Element : *            // Array-like text or U16
        , type Attribute : *          // Array-like text or U16
        , lookupAttribute : Attribute -> AttributeMap a -> Option a
        , isSelfClosing : Element -> Bool
        , attributeAllowsEmptySyntax : Attribute -> Bool
        , encodeElementUtf8 : Element -> Builder U8
        , encodeAttributeUtf8 : Element -> Builder U8
        }
      ) => module
      { data Html
          = TextNode Text
          | ElementNode Element (AttributeMap Text) (Collection Html)
      , encodeUtf8 : Html -> Builder U8
      , decodeUtf8 : Array U8 -> Option Html
      }

This gives us flexibility:

* Encode vs decode. For encode, we want `Collection = Builder` and for decode
  (followed by static analysis) we want `Collection = Array`. It's possible
  that we could do encoding without `lookupAttribute`, and if we don't have
  that, then `AttributeMap` could be something like `lam a. Builder (Attribute,a)`.
* Strict vs nonstrict treatment of elements and attributes. The set of
  elements and attributes can be restricted to things non-custom names.
  For example, we might want to allow `p`, `img`, and `table` as element
  names but not `trogdor`. If we do this, we can represent element names
  as 16-bit unsigned numbers instead of pointers to text. Same with attributes,
  except that `data-*` attributes are somewhat common, and banning them may
  have more serious consequences than banning custom elements.

# Tagless Final HTML Encoding

I think a tagless final approach to building HTML might actually be better.
The drawback is that it is not possible to inspect the HTML after it is built
(e.g. to do some transformational pass at the end). This approach looks like
this:

    sig HtmlBuilder {
      type Node : *
      type Nodes : *
      type Attribute : *
      type Attributes : *
      type AttributeValue : *
      type TextValue : *
      textNode : TextValue -> Node
      elementNode : Element -> Attributes -> Nodes -> Node
      singletonNode : Node -> Nodes
      concatNodes : Nodes -> Nodes -> Nodes
      singletonAttribute : Attribute -> AttributeValue -> Attributes
      concatAttributes : Attributes -> Attributes -> Attributes
      textAttributeValue : Text -> AttributeValue
      -- A zillion elements
      img : Element
      table : Element
      tbody : Element
      -- A zillion attributes
      href : Attribute
      class : Attribute
    }

What does an interpreter look like? We can interpret all the plural types as
catenable builders. Or we could try interpreting directly to a buffer-filling
function:

    type Fill = { buf : MutableArray U8, ix : Int } -> { buf: MutableArray U8, ix : Int }
    module HtmlBuilderImpl {
      type Node, Nodes, Attributes = Fill
      type Element, Attribute = U16
      singletonNode = identity
      elementNode(e,attrs,nodes) = \ixedBuf ->
        encodeElementClosing (nodes (attrs (encodeElementOpening e ixedBuf)))
    }

Something like this would work in SML and its derivatives. It does not
work in the language I'm imagining because I want function types and
value types to be distinct. But maybe something like this instead:

    sig HtmlBuilder {
      effect Node, Nodes, Attributes, AttributeValue, TextValue : Effect
      type Attribute : *
      type Element : *
      textNode : (() ->{TextValue} ()) ->{Node} ()
      elementNode : (Element, () ->{Attributes} (), () ->{Nodes} ()) ->{Node} ()
      singletonNode : (() ->{Node} ()) ->{Nodes} ()
      ...
    }

This looks gross, but using it is still straigtforward:

    // Inferred type is roughly: () ->{Node} ()
    elementNode
      ( table
      , singletonAttribute class (textAttributeValue "cool-class")
      , concatNodes
        ( elementNode(thead, ..., ...)
        , elementNode(tbody, ..., ...)
        )
      )

We could clean this up syntactically by:

1. Making helpers for element and attribute names that call `elementNode`.
   (This is what the Haskell library `lucid` does.)
2. Overloading array syntax (or maybe just adding an infix `<>` operator)

After these improvements, we would have:

    table
      ( class(textAttributeValue "cool-class")
      , thead(..., ...)
        <>
        tbody(..., ...)
      )

This strategy works well in a lot of situations. We cannot count on sharing
being generally possible when encoding an HTML syntax tree to a builder
because escape sequences might be needed. So interpreting the operation
to blast bytes into a buffer is appealing. One unfortunate part of this
approach is that we do not know, in advance, how many bytes are needed.
If we build the syntax tree first, we can walk the tree and compute an
upper bound on the size. But with a tagless final approach, there is no
opportunity to analyze what we are building. We may either (1) double a
buffer and memcpy every time we run out of space or (2) output chunks
as we go. Strategy (2) is the clear winner when the result is being handed
to `writev`. Strategy (2) also makes some sharing possible when the HTML
includes large (multi kilobyte) pieces of text that do not use escape
sequences. Strategy (1) works nicely when we can intuit an upper bound
on the size of the document.

But who knows? Maybe materializing the syntax tree gives the best results
because then you can figure out how much space it will take to encode
the result. It should be possible to try all of these though. Actually,
I think this is the signature we want:

    sig HtmlBuilder {
      effect M : Effect
      type Attribute, Element, AttributeValue, Attributes, Nodes, Node : *
      textNode : (() ->{M} TextValue) ->{M} Node
      elementNode : (Element, () ->{M} Attributes, () ->{M} Nodes) ->{M} Node
      singletonNode : (() ->{M} Node) ->{M} Nodes
      ...
    }

We set `M` equal to a "modify the buffer" state-like effect to blast bytes
directly. We set `M` to be the "uneffectful" effect to build the syntax tree.
