# Ideas from Futhark

I read a Futhark blog post
[Uniqueness Types and In-Place Updates](https://futhark-lang.org/blog/2022-06-13-uniqueness-types.html)
recently and really enjoyed it. The results are mostly intuitive, but it's
nice to see that a system like Futhark's has worked out in practice for
some time. Futhark diverges from uniqueness types (UT) in order to give
array-observing functions more accurate types. For example, in a UT setting,
we might expect:

    write : (Array* a, Int, a) -> Array* a
    read  : (Array* a, Int)    -> (Array* a, a)
    index : (Array a, Int)     -> a

This is awful and weird. Notice that reads from a mutable array are
sequenced in an overly aggressive way. For two consecutive reads, we
end up committing to a particular order in a way that makes it difficult
for the compiler to see that either could really be performed before
the other. What Futhark does is to get rid of the `read` operator
entirely. Its type system makes it possible to use `index` on both
mutable and immutable arrays.

The highlights are:

* Diverge from the starting point of uniqueness types
* Focus on consumption (unique values) and observation (non-unique values)
* Alias analysis becomes important since you need to complete
  all observations before a value is consumed. Alias analysis
  is not needed in an ordinary UT system.

Is the juice worth the squeeze? I'm not sure. The resulting type system
is not horribly complicated, but it's still more complicated than
plain old UT. The benefit is mostly that you don't have to perform
a goofy sequencing on array-read operations.

As soon as you start doing this kind of "borrowing" (as rust calls it),
you end up needing to track aliases. I define borrowing to mean
"allowing scoped read-only access to an otherwise mutable object". 
During the read-only access, you have to make sure that nothing
that aliases the original mutable object escapes. For one-dimensional
arrays, indexing doesn't create aliases (at least in Futhark that's
true), but slicing does.

There might be other ways to address this problem.

## Multiread

One simple option is something like this:

    read1 : (Array* a, Int) -> (Array* a, a)
    read2 : (Array* a, Int, Int) -> (Array* a, a, a)
    read3 : (Array* a, Int, Int, Int) -> (Array* a, a, a, a)

Not only does this feel silly, it also enforces an ordering that we do not
particularly want. All of the computations for the indices have to be
fully evaluated before the index operation takes place. This could lead
to undesirable register pressure. Futhark's system does not have
this problem.

I think multiread is a bad solution.

## Augmented Names

What if a variable's name included more information? For example, what if
aliases shared part of their name with the base object? For example:

    -- context (x : Array* T)
    let x@r = slice(x,0,50)

This is no good.

## Borrowing and Hiding

How about a construct like this:

    -- context (x0 : Array* T)
    (r,x1) = borrow x0 exposing (index : Int -> a):
      let i = index 55
      let j = index 42
      let k = index 30
      i + j + k

Here, we expose an `index` function that operates on the mutable `x`
array, but `x` is not available for use inside of the borrow construct.
This is a kind of neat solution. Flow of control joins back up at the
end of the borrow. Also, `x0` and `x1` are the same array.

Aliasing constructs like `slice` should not be available inside the
borrow block since they would make it possible for an alias to escape.
Perhaps though, we could keep them contained with Haskell's `ST` trick:

    -- context (x0 : Array* World T)
    (r,x1) = borrow x0 : forall (s : Token). (y0 : Array s T) -> Int
      let i = index y0 55
      let j = index y0 42
      let k = index y0 30
      i + j + k

And the restriction would be that `s` could not be used in the
output type. So, it could be modeled with existential quantification
instead:

    borrow x0 : (exists (s : Token). (y0 : Array s T)) -> Int

And then the `s` would actually not be in scope for the output type.
But the approach using universal quantification with a occurs check
probably results in something slightly easier to use (especially
when there are multiple arguments).

Let's look at types of several array operations in this system:

    index : (Array s a, Int) -> a
    slice : (Array s a, Int, Int) -> Array s a
    permute : (Array s0 a, Array s1 Int) -> Array World a
    permute : (Array s0 a, Array s1 Int) -> Array* a
    rotate : Array s a -> Array World a
    rotate : Array s a -> Array* a
    fold : ((b,a) -> b) -> (b, Array s a) -> b

Any mutable (unique) array would not need the alias-tracking trick.
The reason is that all of these would effectively be tagged with
`World`. When you borrow, you don't get something mutable.

It's strange, but it seems like this would work pretty well. I'm
not thrilled with combining two very different tricks to get
everything that I want. It really does seem necessary to use
uniqueness types to sequence writes correctly. And for borrows,
something totally different is needed.

Also, this whole system is really only important for arrays. It's
much less common to need to borrow a mutable user-defined type.
Typically, mutable user-defined types are simply initialized and
then frozen. I'm not even sure that it's important to have the
same system in place for user-defined types, even though it is
certainly possible.

# Parallel Writes

Accurately describing the loose order of writes is difficult. If
an array is written to twice at different indices, then it does
not matter in what order the writes happen. However, for loose
ordering to hold, we have to, in the program, have proof that
the indices are different. For example:

    -- context (x0 : Array* T)
    x1 = tandem x0 // removes x0 from the context
      [ a = r + n
        output(42,a) // must end with output
      , b = s + m + r
        output(43,b) // must end with output
      , c = r + 1
        output(44,b) // must end with output
      ]
      { 42 /= 43, 43 /= 44, 42 /= 44} // trivial proof of index inequality

This is kind of awful. It could also be used for record initialization.
Instead of indices, we would use fields. The tricky thing about
all of this is how to deal with branching. We do not want to allow
branching inside of the `tandem` construct. Branching is bad
because it makes the lowering of the construct much more difficult.
It's enough to think about register pressure. We do not want to
be burdened with choosing between several paths as well. The same
is true when taking an immutable borrow as well. So, if there is
branchy code, we want to have that on the outside. And the tandem
parts should all be the straightline stuff.
