# Evaluating Recursive Join Points

I've run into this problem at twice now, so I'm writing this down so that
I hopefully remember it next time. An interpreter of a language with join
points needs something like this:

    data JoinPointId, Var, Term, Value
    data JoinPointDefinition = {args : [Var], body : Term}
    data JoinPointContextualized =
      { ctx : Map Var Value
      , jctx : Map JoinPointId JoinPointContextualized
      , jpt : JoinPointDefinition
      }
    eval :
         Map Var Value
      -> Map JoinPointId JoinPointContextualized
      -> Term
      -> Either Error Value

The regular context (the one with values) gets to just reuse the `Value` type.
The join point context has to save the definitions of join points along with
the context in which they were defined. When we jump to a join point, we
must discard the existing context. Anything defined after then join point
was defined should not be available when the body of the join point is
evaluated.

In the absense of recursive join points, this strategy works fine. Every time
a join point is declared, the both contexts (value and join point) are stashed
alongside it. However, a recursively defined join point (or a group of them)
cannot just use the existing join-point context. It must augment this context
with itself. But it's own `JoinPointContextualized` is not yet available, and
we are in a catch-22. We could solve this by tying the knot (cyclic data), but
I don't like that solution because it makes the join point context difficult
to print for debugging (without looping).

Instead, here is what like:

    data JoinPointId, GroupId, Var, Term, Value
    data JoinPointDefinition = {args : [Var], body : Term}
    data GroupDefinition =
      { defs : Map JoinPointId JoinPointDefinition
      }
    data GroupContextualized =
      { ctx : Map Var Value
      , jctx : Map GroupId GroupContextualized -- older join points, none from this group 
      , jpts : GroupDefinition
      }
    eval :
         Map Var Value
      -> Map GroupId GroupContextualized
      -> Term
      -> Either Error Value

In this system, join points are organized into groups, and these groups
support recursive bindings. To jump, we need to be able to say either
"jump to something in the same group as myself" or "jump to something
from a group defined earlier". This looks like:

    data Term
      = ... -- a bunch of data constructors
      | Jump (Option GroupId) JoinPointId [Term]

The absence of a group id means "search in the same group as myself". If we
want something from an earlier group, we *must* supply the group id. It is
not optional.

One drawback to this approach is that it makes it so that every join point
is always able to recurse and call itself. It might be worthwhile to add
a boolean to `GroupDefinition` to turn off recursion for a group.
Alternatively, we could just allow non-recursive join points that do not
live in groups to be defined.
