# More Ideas About Borrowing

Borrows really bother me. Almost any approach to borrowing is somewhat
complicated, and it's all to solve a not-terribly common problem. Complications
to the type system include:

* Tracking aliases
* Having lifetime affect types

Additionally, the approaches I suggested on 2023-01-03 mess up A-Normal form.
They add blocks to places where blocks really shouldn't be needed. 
Here's a simpler approach that I thought of. Instead of allowing `borrow`
on the RHS of `let`, make `borrow` be a tail-position construct (like `case`).
The body of a borrow allows a tail-position `reclaim` that undoes the borrow.
For example:

    -- context (x0 : Array* T)
    borrow x0 as (s : Token, y0 : Array s T):
      let i = index y0 55
      let j = index y0 42
      let k = index y0 30
      let r = i + j + k
      reclaim: // in here, s and y0 are not in scope, but x0 is in scope
        write x0 99 r

# Solution for Interior Pointers and Polymorphism

One problem that has bothered me for a while is how to perform exact
GC when dealing with a type like this:

    data Node a
      { keys : Array Int // array unpacked
      , values : Array a // array unpacked
      }

If we take a pointer into the keys and then GC happens and there are
no other references to the node, how do we recover the type `a`. I think
that one simple option is, for data constructors that allow interior
pointers (those with arrays unpacked into them), just manifest the type
variable (or type variables) at runtime. So, a witness of the type `a`
would live in the heap-allocated `Node`. Then, at runtime, when we see
the pointer, we can discern information about size from the pointer itself
(using size class), round down to find the beginning of the object, get the
type witness (or type witnesses) from the beginning of the object, and
then finally trace the object now that its type is fully known.

Why do I think this is acceptable? Generally, I think this kind of overhead
is bad. For example, in type:

    data List a = Cons a (List a) | Nil

Adding a type witness can be costly. For `List`, let's say that `a` is instantiated
to something with 16-bit size. Then, with an 8-bit tag to distinguish between
`Cons` and `Nil`, we end up with `Cons` costing:

    8 bits (tag) + 8 bits (padding) + 16 bits (element) + 32 bits (next list)

That's just 64 bits, and adding a type witness would probably increase this
by 32 bits. The cost is higher because there is very little data in the
data constructor. Data constructors that have arrays unpacked into them
tend to fill out at least a 64-byte cache line. In this situation, 4 bytes
of overhead is acceptably small. Or at least I think so. And also it only
happens where there is polymorphism in play. So if you've got something
like:

    data Item
      { key : Array[16] Word8 // an ipv6 address
      , value : Value
      }

Then there is no need to store any metadata. 
