# Rethink Object, Array, Pointer

A while ago, I gave up on unifying treatment of arrays and interior arrays
(arrays unpacked into data constructors). I need to revisit this soon.
It's possible that I have given up on features that made such a unification
impossible. Here is an idea for the system:

    -- Note: the field must actually be a member of the constructed type.
    data Base = BaseObject Construction Field | BaseArray Type
    -- Note: Ptr is not a first-class type. For example, it cannot be based to
    -- type constructors. It is similar to linear/unique types.
    Ptr : Base -> Type -> Type
    arrayToPtr : forall (a : Type). Array a -> Ptr (BaseArray a) a
    indexPtr : forall (b : Base) (a : Type). Ptr b a -> a
    plusPtr : forall (b : Base) (a : Type). Ptr b a -> Int -> Ptr b a
    -- Projection a pointer is a builtin. This is roughly it's type,
    -- but the typechecker has special rules for it.
    projectPtr : forall (c : Construction). Constructed c -> (f : Field) -> Ptr (BaseObject c f) getFieldArrTy(c,f)
    -- Note: ptrToArray is not a necessary primitive since we could
    -- accomplish the same thing by just preserving a referrence to
    -- the array. We show it here because something like this is
    -- necessary for mutable arrays. The result refers to the beginning
    -- of the array, not the place where the pointer was.
    ptrToArray : forall (a : Type). Ptr (BaseArray a) a -> Array a
    -- When restoring the object, the type system does not care about
    -- the element type. Also, see the note about ptrToArray. Most of
    -- that applies to ptrToObject as well.
    ptrToObject : Ptr (BaseObject c f) x -> Constructed c

That's what we need for immutable objects and immutable arrays. The big
operational concern is how we perform bounds checks. These restrictions
are necessary:

* Pointers cannot be compared with one another since this operation
  would have undefined behavior on pointers with different backing
  objects/arrays.
* A pointer may only be increased, not decreased. That is, `plusPtr`
  does not accept negative arguments.
* At runtime, a pointer is equipped with a length, which may be zero. It
  is also a "distance backward to the base". This does *not* allow us
  to check bounds on a backwards pointer motion because, for constructed
  objects, this refers to the beginning of the object
* Advancing a pointer past the end of its backing object/array must cause
  the program to terminate immidiately.

With these restrictions in place, we can trace pointers that appear on
the stack. From a pointer's runtime representation, we can locate it's
backing object. The entire backing object is treated as live.

# Mutable Pointers

Pointers into mutable data need to be supported as well. We need this for
operations like in-place sort. All of the operations are basically the
same except that the mutable variants of `ptrToArray` and `ptrToObject`
are more important. They are the only way to recover the base from the
pointer.

# Common Path for Read-Only Operations

Operations that read from pointers should be able to be used on both
mutable and immutable pointers. (Same for arrays.) It would be nice
to be able to "borrow" an immutable referrence from a mutable referrence.
It's hard to do this safely though. We need to make sure that the
immutable referrence does not escape, and that's a pain. One simple
solution that only works in effectful contexts is to allow borrowing
into a effectful setting that does not return anything (something of
type `Effect(X)(Unit)`:

    { myMutableArray = ...
    ; numBytes <= readFromStdin(myMutableArray)
    ; Unit <= borrow(myMutableArray) as (myImmutableArray)
      { let w = indexArray(myImmutableArray,5)
      ; ...
      }
    ; numBytesForSecondRead <= readFromStdin(myMutableArray)
    }

This borrow construct only works in effectful settings. Inside the borrow
block, we cannot use `myMutableArray`. And since it must return `Unit`,
we know that it is not possible for the immutable array to escape.
