# Module Signatures with Recursion

I thought about this more, and I think it is better for module signatures
to have fields that reference one another in a non-cyclic way.

# Predicates

How should predicates be handled in the module system? Predicates are
associated with types that they can be used with. For example:

    Predicate : BaseType -> Predicate
    (? >= 50 and ? <= 100) : Predicate BaseInt : P
    Refined : (b : BaseType) -> Predicate b -> Type

Let's consider a module signature for text:

    Any : Predicate Char
    Ascii : Predicate Char // only codepoints less than 128
    Module
    { Text : Predicate Char -> Type
    , singleton : (p : Predicate Char) -> Char {p} -> Text p
    , reverse : (p : Predicate Char) -> Text p -> Text p
    , concat : (p : Predicate Char) -> (q : Predicate Char) -> Text p -> Text q -> Text (p + q)
    , isLowerAscii : Text Any -> Option (Text (? >= 'a' and ? <= 'z'))
    , hasAsciiChar : Text Any -> Char {Ascii} -> Bool
    }

How might this be implemented?

    Utf8Text = module
    { Text = lam (p : Predicate Char) -> [U8]
    , reverse : (p : Predicate Char) -> [U8] -> [U8] = ...
    , concat = ...
    , isLowerAscii = ...
    , hasAsciiChar : [U8] -> Char {Ascii} -> Bool = ...
    }

For UTF-8 encoded text, the predicate on characters cannot be lowered to
a predicate on unsigned 8-bit integers. We should be able to have other
representations of text with restricted character domains. We need to
modify the module signature:
 
    Module
    { Text : Predicate Char -> Type
    , Domain : Predicate Char
    , singleton : (p : Predicate Char) -> Char {p and Domain} -> Text {p and Domain}
    , ... // as before
    }

We would `Domain` to `Any` for text that is UTF-8 encoded. Now we can write:

    LowerAsciiCharPredicate : Predicate Char -> Predicate U8
    AsciiText = module
    { Text = lam (p : Predicate Char) -> [U8{LowerAsciiCharPredicate(p)}]
    , Domain = Ascii
    , singleton : (p : Predicate Char) -> Char {p and Ascii} -> [U8 {LowerAsciiCharPredicate(p and Ascii)}]
    , reverse : (p : Predicate Char) -> [U8{LowerAsciiCharPredicate(p)}] -> [U8{LowerAsciiCharPredicate(p)}] = ...
    }

# Future Exploration of Predicates

I need to explore these topics:

1. User-facing syntax for predicates
2. Predicates on constructed (boxed) types

My chart for stuff in the language now looks like this:

    function{}()(){}            / Function{x,y,z}(A,B)  / Alias (note: DT)
    module{}                    / Module{}              / Alias
    values                      / Int,Bool,Float / Type / Kind
    functor(){}                 / Functor(a : A,B)      / Alias (note: DT)
    tylam (v0 : k0 : Kind).
          (v1 : k1 : Kind)      / Tylam(k0,k1)          / Kind
    positive                    / Predicate BaseInt     / Kind
    N/A                         / BaseInt               / RawType
    where
    MakeType : (t : RawType) -> Predicate t -> Type
    Int = MakeType BaseInt [-(2^63) .. 2^63-1]
    Kind = Predicate X | Type | Tylam(Kind,Kind)

Let's try lowering the signature from earlier to remove type lambda and
polymorphism:

    Module
    { Text : Functor(Predicate Char)(Type)
    , singleton : Functor(p : Predicate Char)(Function(Char {p})(Text(p)))
    , reverse : Functor(p : Predicate Char)(Function(Text(p))(Text(p)))
    , ...
    }

It seems like this works. Cool.

# User-Facing Syntax for Predicates

For numeric types, I like having predicate come optionally after the number:

    u8 {0 .. 40, 50 .. 95}

Maybe something similar for characters:

    char {'a' .. 'z', 'A' .. 'Z'}

We could instead adopt a more simple system that requires writing out types
more fully:

    refined(u8){0 .. 255}
    refined(u8){0 .. 40, 50 .. 95}

Or even

    refined(int(unsigned,8)){0 .. 255}
    refined(bool){true,false}
    refined(constructed { ... }){branch,node}

What is and isn't acceptable as a predicate depends on the base type. Also,
there are no type variables for talking about base types. But there are
variables for talking about predicates. To keep this LL(1), we probably
want something like this:

    refined(int(unsigned,8))(refinement int {0..255})
    refined(bool)(refinement bool {true,false})
    refined(constructed { ... })(refinement constructed {branch,node})

And then we could introduce an `any` keyword that would cause a
minimal refinement to be chosen. The interpretation would depend on
the type.

    refined(int(unsigned,8))(any)

Also, probably use spaces for application since the argument count is known:

    refined u8 any

Possibly introduce an `unrefined` keyword:

    unrefined u8

Or maybe "all" and "sat":

    all u8
    sat u8 (refinement int {0..100})
    sat u8 {0..100} // Possible shorthand

We might be able to support some kind of shorthand like the third option when
the raw type is syntactically a number.
