# Effects System Thoughts

Some thoughts about effect systems:

* Effects systems distinguish themselves from monad-transformer stacks
  by supporting deferred interpretation (i.e. handlers). In the Haskell
  ecosystem, `mtl` offers us something similar.
* Effects systems and monads can model nondeterminism. However, my own
  experience is that this is just too confusing. I think it is better
  to spell out the control flow explicitly.
* Alexis King has a good explanation of why scoped effects are problematic.
  It's only available as a livestreamed talk though. The gist of it is that
  operations like nonagebraic effects like `catch` and `listen` (as they
  are defined in `mtl`) are challenging. Particularly, the
  [interaction with nondeterminism](https://github.com/polysemy-research/polysemy/issues/246)
  is difficult.
* I want a much more simple system: only algebraic effects, no nondeterminism.
* Representing effects as sets is confusing once we introduce effect
  polymorphism. For example, let's say that we are in some context with
  abstract effect `E`. We want to locally layer another effect on top and
  then interpret it. What's the type? Something like `{Except Str} + E`.
  But what if `E` already had `Except Str` as a member? So that doesn't
  make any sense, because certain specializations of the code would result
  in interpretation shrinking `E`. Naming the effects doesn't help. You
  are still have to pick a name that `E` doesn't use. A stack (or list)
  of effects does not have these problems.
* It is important to be able to introduce mutation locally. For example,
  in a parser, we would like to be able to allocate a mutable array,
  parse elements, write them to the array one by one, and freeze the array.
  This means that we need to be able to push a mutation effect onto the
  top of the effect stack. GHC's approach to mutation does not let you
  do this. In GHC, `ST` always lives at the bottom of the effect stack.
* We want to represent `IO` as an effect, but `IO` cannot be interpreted.
  So IO must only live at the bottom of the effect stack.
* It should be possible to use a module system for effect polymorphism.
  An abstract implementation of state:
  `Module { M : Type -> Effect, get : () ->{M a} a, put : a ->{M a} ()}
  (Note: This probably should not be allowed because it requires having
  a syntax for specifying invariance.)

# Module Signature for Byte Parser

This is what the module signature for a byte parser might look like:

    Module
    { M : Effect
    , E : Type
    , fail  :  E       ->{M} a
    , any   :  E       ->{M} U8
    , take  : (E, Int) ->{M} (Array U8)
    , isEoi : ()       ->{M} Bool
    }

In this example, the error type is specialized, so `M` is not a type
constructor. But we still need a type variable in `fail`. What should the
type of `withArray` be so that local mutation is possible:

    withArray : (a, MutableArray a ->{Mut + m} ()) ->{m} (Array a)

I think this is sound.

# A Simple Effects System

Here is one effects system that should have these properties:

    Effect   = State Type | Reader Type | Except Type | Mutation | IO
    Effects  = [Effect]
    Function = MakeFunction Effects Type Type
    eval[Reader] : (a ->{Reader r + m} b, a, r) ->{m} b
    eval[State]  : (a ->{State  s + m} b, a, s) ->{m} (b, s)
    eval[Except] : (a ->{Except e + m} b, a   ) ->{m} (Result e b)
    lift[m0,m1]  : (a ->{m0}           b, a   ) ->{m1 + m0} b

There is no `eval[IO]`, and there is no `eval[Mutation]`. This is nearly
the same thing as Haskell's `transformers` library. There is no deferred
interpretation of effects (like what `mtl` does). For that, we use the
module system.

Using `eval` to interpret multiple effects from the top of the stack
simultaneously should also be allowed even though it is not shown above.
All of the variants of `eval` can be thought of as functions calls.
When the compiler lowers these algebraic effects, all of `eval` statements
just become function application. For example, the function type
`Int ->{State s} Bool` is lowered to `(Int, s) -> (Bool,s)`, so it's easy
to see how `eval[State]` is just plain old function application after the
lowering occurs.

The reason this has to be built into the language instead of implemented
in library space is that I do not want first-class functions. The way
that `Reader` and `State` are implemented in `transformers`, they return
functions. In my hypothetical language, it is not possible to write:

    pureReader : A -> (R -> A)
    pureReader a = (\_ -> a)

On 2023-11-05 and 2023-11-06, I was able to come up with a way to do this
that did not require building it into the language, but the ergonomics
were terrible. At the end of the 2023-11-06 entry, I even suggested the
same thing that I came up with today. The only difference is that,
back then, I wanted to use uniqueness types for mutation, but now I'm
more interested in scoped second-class values.

# What About MonadIO?

I don't personally use `MonadIO` in interfaces I write, but we can recover
this abstraction with:

    Module
    { M      : Effects
    , liftIO : (a ->{IO} b, a) ->{M} b
    }

Since IO can only live at the bottom of the stack, it might make sense to
say that more explicitly in the type system:

    Purity   = Pure | Impure
    Effect   = State Type | Reader Type | Except Type | Mutation
    Effects  = [Effect]
    Function = MakeFunction Effects Purity Type Type

The advantage of this is that we can now talking about stacks that are known
to include IO more naturally: `String ->{M}{Impure} String`. No need for
any equilavent of `MonadIO`.

For abstractions like byte parsers, this does not complicate anything because
we aren't interested in an impure implemenation of byte parsers. But for
something like posix, we end up in a worse place. We want to be able to
write:

    Module
    { M     : Effects
    , open  : Path ->{M} Fd
    , read  : Fd ->{M} (Array U8)
    , write : (Fd, Array U8) ->{M} ()
    }

We want to support both real implementations and in-memory implementations,
but we would end up doing this:

    Module
    { M     : Effects
    , P     : Purity
    , open  : Path ->{M}{P} Fd
    , read  : Fd ->{M}{P} (Array U8)
    , write : (Fd, Array U8) ->{M}{P} ()
    }

Maybe there is a better way to accomplish this though. What if, instead, we
did this:

    Purity   = Pure | Impure
    Effect   = State Type | Reader Type | Except Type | Mutation
    Effects  = MakeEffects [Effect] Purity

Now we get to keep the first signature for posix (the more natural one), but
we could still create a variant of the signature that expected IO if we really
wanted to:

    Module
    { M     : [Effect]
    , open  : Path ->{Effects M IO} Fd
    , read  : Fd ->{Effects M IO} (Array U8)
    , write : (Fd, Array U8) ->{Effects M IO} ()
    }

This means that we need to let the user abstract over both `Effects` and `[Effect]`.
The syntax of this could certainly be made better. We could make IO feel a lot more
like a normal effect. But what do we gain by doing this? It's a small gain:

* The `MonadIO` abstraction is more clear
* It is no longer possible to stack the IO effect to create types that have
  no inhabitants.

I need to think about this more. I don't even like `MonadIO`, so I don't know
why this seems so important to me.

I don't like how the mutability effect can get stacked. It's strange because
it mirrors the shape of the nested callbacks that introduce the effects.
Actually, nevermind. It should almost never get stacked because most nested
uses probably nest the inner `withArray` in a pure context. But it is really
important to let mutation be stacked on top of effect stacks.

Also, should we allow allocations that do not ever get frozen? If we do, should
we allow these to appear in the IO effect. Should we support top-level mutable
data?

# Tags for Search

tag: effects, tag: io
