# More on Mutation and Second-Class Values

In the entry from 2024-03-13, I arrived at this variant of the system
from the Gentrification Gone Too Far paper:

* Class is used to restrict scope
* Mutation is track separately
* Locally bound lambdas are always second class. They are also
  annotated with information about whether or not they close over
  mutable values
* Most functions that take function arguments accept functions that
  close over mutable values. Notable exceptions are `withMutation`
  and `makeArray`.
* Type variables and abstract types are treated as mutable and as
  first class. We need a lot of array primitives to help us create
  immutable arrays. Functions like `permute` need to be built in.

Maybe there is another way. The paper discusses a permission lattice.
What if mutable values were downgraded to "mutable value without read
or write permission" inside of `withMutation` and `withArray`. This
is closer to what GHC does. I have a hard time understanding that part
of the paper, but I think we can just annotate mutable types with an
"access" property. When we close over then environment with `withMutation`,
all of the mutable values stay in scope, but their access level drops.
They can referenced but not read from or written to.

We need a user facing syntax for mutable variables without read/write access.
Somthing like this:

    makeDoubletonArrayArray : (MutableArray {ref} Int, MutableArray {ref} Int) -> Array (MutableArray Int)

Oh, this doesn't work. We cannot implement this function because we cannot
get the "reference only" annotation off of the result.
