# A Different Resolution Strategy 

This iterates on the solution from 2024-02-06. What about tracking levels
and nothing else? And then writing a separate type for resolution:

    data Level = L1 | L2
    data Resolution = Resolved | Unresolved
    data Component : Resolution -> Level -> Type
      GroundType : Component r L2
      Integer : Component r L1
      FunctionDefinition : FunDef r -> Component r L1
      FunctionType : [Component r L1] -> Component r L1 -> Component r L2
      ModuleDefinition : Map MemberId (Component r L1) -> Component r L1
      ModuleType : Map MemberId (Component L2) -> Component L2
      Variable : Id -> Component Unresolved L1
      FunctorArgIndex : Int -> Component r L1 -- possibly allow both levels?
      TypeRecurseIndex : Int -> Component r L1
      Project : Component r L1 -> MemberId -> Component r L1

The context during typechecking looks like this:

    ctx : Map Id (Component Resolved L1)

# Problem for Resolution Tracking 

I'm starting to think that none of this is really worth it. I realized that
a resolved component has additional invariants that it is not possible to
enforce this way. Consider this:

    Project (ModuleDefinition ...) myField

This is not in normal form. It is possible to reduce this by looking up
`myField` in the ModuleDefinition's map. And this reduction must be performed
before we compare components for equality. But an expression like

    Project (FunctorArgIndex 0) myField

Is in normal form, so this is allowed.
