# Write After Freeze

In world where computers were different, we could eliminate the undefined
behavior of a write-after-freeze sequence. Writing to a mutable array
after it has been frozen should cause a program to exit immidiately.
With an ISA like CHERI, this could actually be done. We could revoke write
permisson after the freeze, which would cause subsequent writes (through
any alias) to kill the program. This would be cool because it would make
GHC's approach to mutable arrays more sound. However, it is just not most
computers actually work.

In theory, it's possible to do something like this if the array's byte size
is a multiple of 4096. We can mark entire pages as read-only in x86-64.
However, it's a heavy operation (a syscall), and the size restriction
makes it unusable. Oh well.

# Structs, Mutation, and Second-Class Types

This picks up where I left off on 2024-03-18. At that time, I decided to
simplify the system I had been thinking about for dealing with mutation.
I traded away expressiveness for simplicity. Now I am thinking about how
to incorporate struct-like types into this system. A struct-like type
means something that is not heap allocated. Here are a few examples
of things that users often want to module with struct-like types:

    type Attribute = Attribute { key : Text, value : Text }
    type Option a = Some { value : a } | None
    type Result e a = Succes { value : a } | Failure { error : e }

These are small. Attribute might take 16 or 24 bytes depending on how much
space a pointer takes up. The size of Option and Result depends on the size
of the argument(s), but we typically only need 8 or 16 bytes for these.
A heap allocation for anything this small is wasteful, so we want to unpack
them into data constructors and arrays. This also means that we have to
copy them onto the stack when we project them from objects, so it could
be beneficial to introduce fused indexing and field-access operations:

    index : (Array a, Int) -> a // normal indexing, polymorphic
    indexProject : (Array X, Int, [Field]) -> prj(X,[Field]) // index, then project from struct recursively

The `indexProject` variant is not a regular primop. It can only be applied
to arrays of compile-time-known structs (i.e. it is not polymorphic). However,
it makes it clear that we are not copying a struct to the stack. Consider
performing a fused index-project operation with the Attribute type defined
above:

    indexProject(myAttributes,42,[value]) : Text

The compiler would lower this by first multiplying 42 by the size of Attribute.
Let's say that the size is 16. Then we add the offset of `value` (probably 8 in
this example). So, we end up with: 42 * 16 + 8. Unfortunately, a text field is
not the greatest example because text (which is just `Array U8`) is actually
comprised of a pointer and a length. So we actually still have to read up two
adjacent fields. Or maybe just one actual read and then some bit shifting
to break it apart. But, the point is that we are certain to not read `key`.

As an aside, I wonder if it possible to take advantage of length bounds for
arrays that are object fields. That is, can we store the length as a 2-byte
field if we know that it is less than 2^16? This might cause the length to
be stored further from the pointer to align fields correctly, although we
would want to make sure that it was likely to be in the same cache line.
The drawback of this is that it makes an object's memory layout dependent
on refinements, which makes zero-cost upcasting not work. So I think this
is not actually a good idea. We could have a completely different array type
(e.g. `Array16 U8`) for this purpose though. Like narrow integral types,
we would nearly almost upcast to the largest size, and that's what all the
usual functions would work on, and then we would cast down (with a check
that crashes on large values) to the small size right before writing it
to an object. This seems workable. But I'll get back to what I was actually
trying to think through now.

So, here are the questions:

* Should struct types have mutable and immutable variants? (Heap allocated types do)
* Should struct types be able to hold mutable fields?

I think the answer to both of these is no.

We should not need a mutable variant
because a struct embedded in a mutable heap-allocated object
can effectively already be mutated by a fused write-project operation.
And if it was not in a heap-allocated object, then it should be small
anyway, and the (register allocation) benefits of building an object
slowly by mutation are less pronounced for small objects.

We should not need for struct types to hold mutable fields because it is
simply not useful. Do we ever need `Option (MutableArray U8)`? No.
Mutable values are passed as arguments, not returned as values. They
cannot be returned as values because they are second class. But what
about putting a second-class immutable array inside of `Option`.
Still no. Second-class values (and mutable values) cannot exist in
any kind of collection. So there cannot be a find-like function
that optionally returns them.
