# Extending Unique Types to Handle Borrowing 

Type systems with uniqueness types provide two modalities: unique and
nonunique. What if we extend nonuniqueness with a universe level to
track what objects can be contained? The system is ordered and looks
like this:

* Unique: There is only 1 reference to this value. Unique objects may
  container other unique object or nonunique objects at any level. 
* Nonunique(N): There are 1 or more references to this value. Nonunique
  objects at level N may not contain unique objects. They may contain
  objects at levels greater than or equal to N.

According to this ordering, we can freely upcast unique values to nonunique
values (at any level), and we can upcast a nonunique value at level N to
level N + M (where M is nonnegative).

Let's represent all of these as integers. Unique is zero, Nonunique(0) is one,
Nonunique(1) is two, and so on. Let's say that we have can create usable types
with:

    T : BaseType -> Nat -> Type

In this system, base types are paired with a uniqueness annotation. Borrowing
looks like this:

    borrow :
         T A 0
      -> (T A 2 -> T B 1)
      -> (T A 0, T B 1)

This is the most simple version of borrowing. It means that no child of the
unique object can escape the borrow. This is good, but it's a little too
restrictive. For example, a unique array may have nonunique objects (objects
in universe 1), but when we borrow, we would like for the children to be
able to escape the borrow. It's just the borrowed (immutable) array that
should not escape.

Sometimes, we want to have children that have an "inherited level". This means
that when the parent is borrowed, the children get borrowed as well. This
happens when, for example, we have a unique array of unique objects. In such
a case, borrowing should let us treat the whole thing as nonunique, and nothing
should be allowed to escape the borrow.

Is there any value in borrowing from something at level 1? I don't think so.
We might only want three levels. Higher levels are helpful for nested borrows
though. For example:

    borrow xsMut
      (\xsImm -> borrow ysMut
        (\ysImm -> ...
        )
      )

The lambda passed to should to be able to return subobjects of `xsImm`, but
a three-level system makes this impossible. If we had infinite levels, we
could do this:

    borrow : forall (n : Nat).
         T A 0
      -> (T A (n + 2) -> T B (n + 1))
      -> (T A 0, T B n)

And then:

    borrow 0 xsMut (\xsImm -> borrow 1 ysMut (\ysImm -> ...))

And now we can do what we want. But for users, something like this is a
nightmare, and level polymorphism would show up all over the standard
library. I think it's better to just accept the less expressive system.

First, let's reformulate the system:

* Unique: There is only 1 reference to this value. Unique objects may
  container other unique objects, first-class objects, and second-class
  objects.
* Unscoped (Nonunique): There are 1 or more references to this value.
  Cannot have unique children.
* Scoped (Nonunique): There are 1 or more references to this value.
  Cannot have unique children.

Weirdly, scoped and unscoped values may contain each other. Types with
child objects have inheritance of uniqueness. So, for option, for example,
we have something like this:

    base type Option (A : BaseType) = Some (T A Inherit) | None

And then for arays, we might have:

    type constructor Array [U : Uniqueness, A : BaseType]
    write : T Array [U,A] Unique -> Int -> T A u -> T Array [U,A] Unique
    index : T Array [U,A] Scoped -> Int -> T A (Max U Unscoped)

This is really confusing, and it involves more variables than I want it to.
Let's try again, using star for unscoped, ampersand for scoped, and the digit
one for unique:

    type constructor Array (A : Type) // element type includes a uniqueness
    write : 1 Array a -> Int -> a -> 1 Array a
    index : & Array a -> Int -> WeakenTo 1 a

Here, the uniqueness and the base type for the element have been consolidated,
but this is basically the same thing. In particular, `index` has a strange
return type because we do not restrict its argument. What about this instead:

    // Syntax note: Star 2 (*2) means "Nonunique Unscoped"
    data Scopedness = Scoped | Unscoped
    data Uniqueness = Unique | Nonunique Scopedness
    type constructor Array : Uniqueness -> BaseType -> BaseType
    write : Array u a @ 1 -> Int -> a @ u -> Array a @ 1
    index : Array *n a @ *2 -> Int -> a @ *n

This works. Now, we can index into arrays of scoped element and arrays of
unscoped elements but not arrays of unique elements. Now let's think about
deep borrows:

    borrow :
         (Array u a @ 1)
      -> (Array *2 a @ *2 -> b @ *1)
      -> (Array u a @ 1, b @ *1)

But this isn't expressive enough. What if we have a mutable (unique) array
of immutable (nonunique) arrays. We would like to be able return any of the
child arrays from the lambda. But this formulation degrades them to unscoped
values. The problem is that we want the unique-vs-nonunique distinction to
be pushed down all the way from the top. We want to be able to deeply
borrow from a structure, which means treating all unique component as
second class to prevent escape. Immutable data doesn't need this deep
transformation, but it's hard to capture this relationship. Let's try
again with a different approach. First, get rid of the scoped/unscoped
distinction:

    write : ArrayOfMut a @ 1 -> Int -> a @ 1 -> ArrayOfMut a @ 1
    write : ArrayOfImm a @ 1 -> Int -> a @ * -> ArrayOfImm a @ 1
    index : ArrayOfImm a @ * -> Int -> a @ *

This suggests the following:

    write : Array u a @ 1 -> Int -> a @ u -> Array u a @ 1
    index : Array * a @ * -> Int -> a @ *

And this would be perfect. It's borrowing that's causing trouble. Or more
accurately, it's a particular feature that I want borrowing to have. I want
the lambda passed to a borrow to be able to return some children of the
argument but not all of them. Maybe this is just asking too much.

    borrow1 : (b does not contain any of [Array * a, a])
         (Array 1 a @ 1)
      -> (Array * a @ * -> b @ u)
      -> (Array 1 a @ 1, b @ u)
    borrow2 : (b does not contain any of [Array * a])
         (Array * a @ 1)
      -> (Array * a @ * -> b @ u)
      -> (Array 1 a @ 1, b @ u)

This relies on a very magic type, so I don't love it. We could introduce
second-class type as an orthogonal language feature:

    borrow :
         (Array u a @ 1 {1})
      -> (Array u a @ * {2} -> b @ v)
      -> (Array 1 a @ 1, b @ v)

I don't like this because there's quite a bit of overlap in what these mean,
and a unique value is always going to be first class.

# Borrowing With Runtime Check for Aliasing Output

Another idea is a borrow with a simple type but strange runtime behavior:

    borrow :
         (Array u a @ 1)
      -> (Array u a @ * -> b @ v)
      -> (Array 1 a @ 1, b @ v)

After `borrow` completes, the runtime scans the returned object and figures
out what needs to be copied. In many cases, static analysis (even static
analysis guided solely by types) can prove the escape is impossible. In cases
where static analysis cannot verify nonaliasing, this can become expensive.
Consider borrowing an immutable reference into a 4GB mutable map and then
using the map in a read-only way. If the runtime ends up scanning that
data structure (because escape cannot be ruled out), the cost of scanning
will dominate the operation.

In spite of the downside, I really like this solution. It simplifies the
type system considerably.

# Allocating Unique Values

We need to be able to return unique values from functions. I think this
can just be done with a monad or effect for allocation that prevents
things from being considered the same:

    newArray : (Int, a @ *) => Array * a @ 1
    run : (Unit => b @ *) -> b @ *

The type of `run` is just right. There is no way to embed a unique value
inside of a non-unique value.
