# Compile Language Without Regions to Language with Regions

Suppose that we have a source language that looks like a typical GCed
language. Let's try using a language with regions and existentials as the
target language. Trivially, we can assign each object to its own region.
That is, all of the indirections would get wrapped in `Pack`. That's
the most naive lowering. With sophisticated analysis, we might be able
to improve some of these. Here are some examples:

* Suppose we create two regions, allocate a bounded number of objects
  into each, and then they go out of scope at the same moment (or at
  nearby moments, but what does "nearby" mean?). These two regions
  should be merged into a single region.
* Suppose that we have a mutable map where the keys and values are
  both primitive types. Nonpathological use of the map results
  in a liveliness graph where the root dominates all child nodes.
  This indicates that they should all be in the same region. I don't
  know how to perform this kind of analysis generally though.

I think this is worth considering. I'm not sure if other projects
have taken this approach.

In the scenario with mutable maps, how does the type look. In the
low-level language, `insert` looks like this (region `P` is the region
where primitives live):

    insert : {r} -> Map @r -> Key @P -> Value @P -> Map @r

And in the high-level language:

    insert : Map -> Key -> Value -> Map

I don't like this type. We need something that makes it clear that this
mutates one of its arguments. The options are uniqueness types and some
kind of ST-style effect. The second one is a little more compatible with
the spirit of regions:

    insert : mut Map -> Key -> Value -> mut Map

But the first one gives us a correct interface for dealing with mutable
maps:

    insert : Map* -> Key -> Value -> Map*

But the second one lets us write read-only functions like `lookup` without
the silly "thread the argument through the result" API.

In the low-level language, we ultimately need to end up with three region
capabilities: read, write, and allocate. We cannot ever really truly
freeze a region, but we can drop down to just a read capability to
make data appear frozen to certain regions. For example:

    // r = read, w = write, a = allocate
    insert : {s=rwa} -> Map @s -> Key @P -> Value @P -> Unit
    lookup : {s=r} -> Map @s -> Key @P -> Value @P

This must somehow be reflected in the high-level language. Each object
in the high-level language is a packed region-object pair, so we have
to do this:

    insert : Map{rwa} -> Key{r} -> Value{r} -> Unit
    lookup : Map{r} -> Key{r} -> Value

The presence of an allocate capability in the high-level language is
confusing, but it is necessary. This translates to:

    insert : Pack {s=rwa} Map@s -> Pack {s=r} Key@s -> Pack {s=r} Value@s -> Unit

So the region is existentially quantified but the capability needs to bleed
though. I don't think it is difficult to do this.

The `Map` data type needs to be implemented in the lower-level language
and exposed in the high-level language. I believe that any mutable structure
that needs to live in a single region will need to be handled the same way.
We cannot make use of the allocate capability in the high-level language
because we do not get access to the unpack operation there. But reading
and writing are still fair game. By that, I mean that projection and
field assignment are available on any user-defined types. It's just not
possible to define a type where children are in the same region.
As an example:

    data Person = { age : S64, name : Array U8, hobbies : Array Hobby }

It we wrote that in the low-level language, the person's name and hobbies
would all live in the same region as the person. But it we wrote this in
the high-level language, it would translate to this in the low-level
language:

    data Person = { age : S64, name : Pack (Array U8), hobbies : Pack (Array Hobby) }

I don't like the syntactic disagreement here. It seems like it would
be better if the same construct had the same meaning in both languages.
But the "all in one region" variant doesn't even exist in the high-level
language. So we would have to choose the "all in different regions"
variant as the least common denominator. But I don't want that one to
get the good syntax. I'll just move on for now.

One other problem is whether name and hobbies should have anything more
than a read capability. If the fields inherit capabilities (e.g. read-write)
from the parent, then we need to put the children in the same region as
the parent. Aliasing with write permission is not good.

It might actually be best if users do not get access to field assignment
(for mutating objects) in the high-level language. All objects with
user-defined types must be read only. This would mean that we could not
store a mutable map inside a user-defined type, but we could still create
a mutable map. It would just need to be bound to an identifier and could
only be manipulated that way.

Maybe the high-level language is not a good idea. It's hard for me to tell.
I could rethink it later.

# Representation of Pack

I think that it might be possible to represent `Pack` as two 64-bit words.
One of them is the pointer to the object itself and the other is some
kind of identifier for the region (the region identifier probably only
needs 32 bits). If regions were guaranteed to be layed out contiguously,
we could use a single 64-bit word. But this is not a good thing to rely on.
