# Dependent Types Instead of Subtyping

I can't believe I'm thinking about dependent types again, but I'm thinking
about a restricted use of them.

* Types do not contain proofs
* Proofs live in a different part of the language
* Functions do not return proofs about their results
* Functions may take proof arguments

How would this work?

    index :
         (xs : Array a)
      -> (ix : Int)
      -> (ix >= 0)
      -> (ix < length xs)
      -> a
    singleton : a -> Array a
    proofSingletonSize : (x : a) -> (length (singleton x) = 1)
    proofSingletonSatisfies :
         (p : Type -> Proof)
      -> (x : a)
      -> p a
      -> (all p (singleton x))
    sumSmall : (xs : Array Int) -> (all (< 100) xs) -> Int

We can compose these with:

    myArray = singleton 55
    theSum = sumSmall myArray (proofSingletonSatisfies (<100) 55 (trivial(55 < 100)))

Notice that `singleton` does not need to return any information about
the resulting array. The type system tracks that `myArray ~ singleton 55`
and automatically unifies these when typechecking `sumSmall`.

What about a wrapper for `sumSmall` for situations where we are not sure
that the precondition holds? If it does hold, we want to run `sumSmall`,
and if not, we can just crash the program:

    checkAllLessThanHundred : (xs : Array Int) -> Option (all (< 100) xs)
    sumSmallOrFail : Array Int -> Int
    sumSmallOrFail(xs):
      case checkAllLessThanHundred(xs):
        None: fail("precondition not met")
        Just proof: sumSmall(xs, proof)

But to do this, I've had to break one of the rules that I wanted to uphold.
The function `checkAllLessThanHundred` has to run at runtime, but it returns
a proof (which has no runtime representation). I don't think that it is
possible to avoid this. In the scenario that I consider ideal, our proof
functions tell us additional information about the results of value-level
functions. But sometimes, we need to learn additional information about
a value, and we lack access to information about its provenance.

We can consider several possible function arrows:

* Functions from values to values (plain old functions). These are not total,
  and they may crash.
* Total functions from values and proofs to proofs. Any
  recursion is seriously restricted. They are elided at runtime.
* Functions from values and proofs to optional proofs. These have to be
  evaluated at runtime. It's actually ok for these to diverge since we
  are not trying to elide them.
