# Recursive Groups with Type Variables, Again

Reflecting on the entry from 2024-01-10, I have realized that functions
in recursive groups must not accept *any* type arguments other than the
ones passed to the entire group. This prevents us from writing some
programs that do not contain polymorphic recursion, but I believe that
the restriction is not generally a hinderance.

I thought more about the syntax. I think that it would be preferrable
to move the type arguments to the normal position and then require that
they all match exactly. For example:

    { alpha = ...
    ; foo rec : Function[A](A, S64)(Option A) = ...
    ; bar rec : Function[A](S64)(Option A) = ...
    ; baz rec : Function[A](A, S64)(A) = ...
    ; beta : Function[C](C,C,Bool)(C) = ...
    }

When calling another function in the recursive group, the type variable
arguments are not technically needed. However, I think it is best to
require their presence. Having them present means that if a user
refactors code to move a function out of a recursive group, all of its
call sites do not need to be updated. Another way of saying this is
that it is a more consistent syntax for the end user.

# Begin and End a Group

There is an annoying ambiguity around where a recursive group begins and
ends. Let's say that we have two recursive groups next to each other:

    { alpha rec : Function[A](...)(...) = ...
    ; beta rec : Function[A](...)(...) = ...
    ; gamma rec : Function[B](...)(...) = ...
    ; epsilon rec : Function[B](...)(...) = ...
    }

Here, it is clear that these are two distinct groups because the type
variables argument list is different. But what if we wanted to use the
same name for the type variable? This is kind of a thorny spot in the
design. Normally, a recursive group can be broken by just introducing
a non-recursive binding. But we might not want to do that. We could
name the groups, but the names would only serve the purpose of breaking
groups up, and it's not even common to need to do this. I think I
prefer the fake binder trick:

    { alpha rec : Function[A](...)(...) = ...
    ; beta rec : Function[A](...)(...) = ...
    ; _ = unit
    ; gamma rec : Function[B](...)(...) = ...
    ; epsilon rec : Function[B](...)(...) = ...
    ; _ = unit
    }

Any kind of code generation tool can safely append an unused binding
like this to break up groups. I don't love this, but it works well enough
and it does not require anything sophisticated.

# Tooling for Discovery and Documentation

I'm thinking about this mostly because of how bad Haddock is at generating
documentation for instantiations of indefinite modules (a GHC Haskell
Backpack feature). If a module is generated as the result of functor
application, there needs to be some way to view the (normalized) types
of everything in it. For example, if there is a `Map` functor, and we
apply to module that provides an ordering for strings, I want to be
able to see a type signature for our `StringMap` (or whatever we name it)
module, and it needs to have things like:

    insert : Function[a](Map(a),String,a)(Map(a))

Also, we need some way to attach documentation to function declarations,
and that documentation can be propogated to any aliases of the function.

Since types are defined structurally, they are more complicated. I suppose
it should be possible to attach documentation to a type alias. In many
cases, we want to show an alias in documentation rather than the
fully type. But it's tricky. For `insert`, we want to show `String`
rather than `Key`. But if we had `String` defined to be `Array U8`,
we probably would still want to see `String` there. This just requires
more thought.

# Two GHC Backpack Bugs

I need to write these up as issues with minimal reproducers, but I'll
just jot them down here to help remind me:

* If you use `let x = Z`, where the type of `Z` is `TYPE R`, where R
  is an abstract top-level runtime rep from a signature, you get a
  compiler panic. But if you write `case Z of {x -> ...}`, the panic
  goes away.
* There is a mistake with indefinite libraries inheriting
  signatures. It waits to manifest itself until you try to instantiate
  the indefinite library. The workaround is, any time you would inherit
  a signature, just copy the `hsig` file.

Both of these regressions appeared in GHC 9.4 and are present in every
version of GHC since then. They did not appear in GHC 9.2.

Actually, I went ahead and came up with a minimal reproducer for the first one:

    {-# LANGUAGE DataKinds #-}
    {-# LANGUAGE UnboxedTuples #-}
    {-# LANGUAGE KindSignatures #-}
    {-# LANGUAGE PolyKinds #-}
    
    unit example where
      signature Order where
        import GHC.Exts
        data R :: RuntimeRep
        data E :: TYPE R
        pickMinimum :: E -> E -> E
        pickMaximum :: E -> E -> E
      module OrderedPair where
        import Order (E,pickMinimum,pickMaximum)
        makeOrderedPair :: E -> E -> (# E, E #)
        makeOrderedPair a b =
          let greater = pickMaximum a b
              lesser = pickMinimum a b
           in (# greater, lesser #)

Building this with `ghc --backpack buggy.bkp`. With GHC 9.2, compilation
succeeds, but with GHC 9.4+, we get this:

    <no location info>: error:
        panic! (the 'impossible' happened)
      GHC version 9.6.4:
            isUnliftedType
      E :: TYPE R
      Call stack:
          CallStack (from HasCallStack):
            callStackDoc, called at compiler/GHC/Utils/Panic.hs:189:37 in ghc:GHC.Utils.Panic
            pprPanic, called at compiler/GHC/Core/Type.hs:2257:7 in ghc:GHC.Core.Type
      CallStack (from HasCallStack):
        panic, called at compiler/GHC/Utils/Error.hs:454:29 in ghc:GHC.Utils.Error

# Structural Types and a REPL

If functions aren't first-class data, and if all types are defined
structurally, and if at a REPL, all types are fully resolved, then any data
from one REPL session can be trivially persisted after a reload. The
representation of the data has to be something super inefficient
(field names and data constructor names present as strings), but all
the data and all the types are still correct after a reload.
