# Mutation Difficulties

I am beginning to think that supporting user-defined long-lived mutable
data structures is not a good idea. Here are the difficulties:

* Automatic memory management: Even though remembered sets and card tables are
  well understood, I do not like them. If the user creates (and frequently
  mutates) a lot of mutable objects, performance becomes awful.
* Type system: Supporting mutable records and arrays is complicated.
  Should immutable arrays/objects be able to refer to mutable data?
* Global mutable data: Synchronized access to global mutable data is tricky.

# Simplified Mutation

Here are the characteristics of a more simple system:

* Immutable data cannot refer to mutable data
* There are no top-level mutable values
* All type variables and abstract types are only instantiated with
  immutable types
* Mutable arrays only have immutable elements
* Some mutable types (like arrays) support a "borrow" construct that
  allows us to perform noneffectful operations on an immutable view of
  the data. The borrowed value is immutable and second class.
* Class is used to prevent escape
* Mutability is used to purge the context of mutable objects an
  effectfulness boundaries.
* There are first-class mutable values, but they cannot be frozen and
  cannot be used as fields in objects. The user can allocate them in
  any effectful context.

I am not certain of the `withMutation` construct. If it exists, it can return
second-class values (since it does not introduce any) but not mutable values.
It lets the user do this:

    withMutation:
      myHashMap <= newMutableHashMap
      myDisjointSet <= newDisjointSet
      ...

We can freely allocate mutable data in here, and that mutable data is first
class. If we do not support this, we can simplify the system a bit by having
all mutable data be second class. I think it is better to not support this. 

We end up with this ordering:

    Immutable First-Class > Immutable Second-Class > Mutable (Second-Class)

Most of the `withArray`-like constructs actually let you close over immutable
second-class values, just not mutable values.

# Built-in Types

Certain mutable types could not be implemented in this system. They need to
be provided as built-in types:

* Disjoint Set. This is monomorphic since it can only be sets of integers.
  It's the perfect candidate for this kind of thing. It does not support
  borrowing. GC is simple this is is just two arrays of integers (or one
  array of integer pairs).
* Mutable int sets (e.g. roaring bitsets)
* Mutable Hash Maps (text keys). I don't personally use hash maps a whole
  lot, but they are commonly used for all kinds of things. These support
  borrowing, and they can be frozen at the end.

Mutable hash maps (and several other kinds of mutable maps) can be implemented
in a way that makes the GC's job easier. The only ever grow. That is, once
they allocate memory, that memory continues be used until the end of the map's
lifetime. Depending on how duplicate inserts are handled, it is possible that
references to values might also have guaranteed preservation. If the
implementation is aware of the GC, it can build a list of necessary updates
as insert, update, and delete operations come in. The references through the
mutable map can be treated like ordinary references. On a minor GC, we can
update the reference counts only of the newly inserted elements. This way,
we could have a mutable hash map with millions of elements and we would not
need to scan the whole structure every time. In fact, this should be even
better than a card table because it is precise. The detail are messy, but
something like this should be possible.

Notably, we cannot have built-in mutable ordered maps that support keys with
arbitrary comparison functions. We can have maps that are parametrically
polymorphic in their element type though. To handle this, we can just
specialize for each possible size since there are a finite number of
supported sizes (I think 64 or 128 bytes is a reasonable upper bound).
