# Linear Types, Again, Again

On 2024-04-15 and 2024-04-15, I wavered back and forward on whether linear
types are an acceptable way to introduce mutation to a pure language. For me,
the hardest thing about linear types is that they don't actually guarantee
uniqueness. It's a guarantee about consumption. And to get the uniqueness
guarantee, it needs to be paired with some kind of CPS primitive
(e.g. `withMutableArray`). And even though I know this in my head, it's
hard to feel that it's true.

The variant of linear types suggested in the Linear Haskell paper has
a good story for data types. Fields in data types support linearity
annotations. These annotations affect how object construction consumes
values (i.e. assigning to a nonlinear field counts as multiple consumptions)
and how scrutinee consumes values (i.e. to consume an object linearly,
one must scrutinize exactly once and then consume only the linear fields
linearly). These two rules are pretty intuitive.

The Linear Haskell paper has an `Unrestricted` type, and I think it's kind
of goofy. It has two purposes that I can see. The first purpose is to help
out of the existing data types that get linearity pushed onto them. The
paper suggests that linear fields be the default. For tuples, we run into
this weird situation:

    readArray :: MutArr a -o Int -> Pair (MutArr a) a

To consume the result linearly, we have to case on the tuple, and then we have
to consume both components once. But this isn't what we want. Instead, the
paper defines this function as:

    readArray :: MutArr a -o Int -> Pair (MutArr a) (Unrestricted a)

And now the caller is free to consume the element as many times as they want.
But a different option is to make `Pair` multiplicity polymorphic:

    readArray :: MutArr a -o Int -> Pair {One} {Many} (MutArr a) a

The type of this function looks worse, but it's actually easier for the caller
because there is no need to unwrap the element.

The other use of `Unrestricted` is to prevent mutable values from escaping
their scope:

    newMArray :: Int -> (MArray a -o Unrestricted b) -o b
    freeze    :: MArray a -o Unrestricted (Array a)

But we could instead combine allocation and freezing to get:

    withMArray :: Int -> (MArray a -o MArray a) -o Array a

This API is materially different. This is completely incompatible with affine
types, and the approach from the paper works with affine types. Practically
speaking, this makes it unnatural to write an early-return variant of
`withMArray`. But I still think it may be a worthwhile trade.

My biggest gripe with `Unrestricted` is that there's something deeply
unintuitive about its behavior. With the LH array primitives, we would
freeze an array like this:

    let x = freeze y
     in case x of
          Unrestricted z -> ... z ... z ...

We can't reference `x` more than once. That would count as non-linear
consumption. But we have reference `z` more than once. And that feels strange.
They are the same thing. One is just wrapped up in a data constructor.
I ought to be able to transform the program to:

    let x = freeze y
     in ... (case x of {Unrestricted z -> z}) ... (case x of {Unrestricted z -> z}) ...

But that consumes `x` twice, so now `y` is consumed in a nonlinear fashion,
and the typechecker will reject this.

More generally, I don't like the thought of function that consumes an
argument linearly and returns a value whose consumption is effectively
nonlinear. For example:

    example : MutableArray* a -> Int

In LH, such a function is uninhabited. LH has a very generous notion of
consumption for primitive types, but I would want any function that
operates on a primitive type to have nonlinear consumption of it.

Revisited the rule that I said I wanted, let's reconsider `withMArray`:

    withMArray :: Int -> (MArray a -o MArray a) -o Array a

This actually violates my rule because the callback is consumed linearly,
but the resulting array is effectively nonlinear (because `index` consumes
its immutable array argument nonlinearly). We could modify the type without
loss of expressivity:

    withMArray :: Int -> (MArray a -o MArray a) -> Array a

Already, it was impossible for the callback to close of values that were
consumed linearly because they would have been dropped. (There is not a
way to return them and there are not functions that graft them into
the mutable array.) But let's consider two variants of this function that
can return something alongside the array:

    withMArray :: Int -> (MArray a -o Pair m One b (MArray a)) ->{1} Pair m Many b (Array a)
    withMArray :: Int -> (MArray a -o Pair m One b (MArray a)) ->{m} Pair m Many b (Array a)

Either way, it's a mouthful. The second variant is more consistent with what
I want. If we instantiate `m ~ One`, we end up with the ability to close over
linearly consumed values. And if we instantiate with `m ~ Many`, we cannot
close over them. The first variant becomes, when `m ~ One`, a functions that
consume something (the callback) linearly, but returns something (`Pair Many Many b (Array a)`)
for which linear consumption is trivial. And this is something that I wanted
to avoid.
