# Mutable And Immutable Types

Think more about how to describe mutable types that cannot be
frozen. Here is what I wrote yesterday:

    ImmutableList a = Cons a (ImmutableList a) | Nil
    MutableList1 a = Cons a (mut MutableList1 a){1} | Nil
    MutableList2 a = Cons a{1} (mut MutableList1 a){1} | Nil

We want to have mutable types that cannot be frozen, immutable types,
and temporarily mutable types that are probably going to be frozen.
Anything that is immutable or that will be frozen must not have linear fields.
So when we declare a type, we have to make it clear whether it is a mutable
type or an immutable type:

    ImmutableList a = object immutable { Cons = { head : a, tail : $self),  Nil } }
    MutableList1 a = object mutable { Cons = { head : a {*}, tail : $self {1}),  Nil } }
    MutableList2 a = object mutable { Cons = { head : a {1}, tail : $self {1}),  Nil } }

Both of the mutable list types do not require `$self` to be a linear field,
but if it is nonlinear, then it becomes impossible to construct an object.
(The allocation function requires that the mutable objects it returns be
consumed linearly.) Similarly, `MutableList2` does not actually require that
its argument be a mutable type. It might actually be useful to allow immutable
types to appear here, so they need a "liberate" primitive that counts as a
linear consumption but provides an alias that allows the object to be used
freely.

# Regions Without Bifurcating API

I keep thinking about how to incorporate regions into this system. The
difficult part is doing so without making every function awful to use.

Here's an idea. What if we didn't track which region something was in with
the type system. This means that it would be left to the user to ensure that
no terrible leaks happened. The user could create regions and could control
which region allocation functions used. How would the runtime decide when a
region could be reclaimed? I'm not sure. The runtime would have to figure
this out with tracing or with a reference count on the region. But this
defeats the purpose of regions.

# Situations Where Regions Shine

Regions are straightforward to use when the input and the output of a function
are guaranteed to be nonoverlapping. For example:

    foo : Function(R1,R2,R3)(x : Foo {R1}, y : Bar {R2})(Baz {R3)

This is easy. This case comes up when we deal with parsing a byte sequence
into a syntax tree. It's a little tricky because the output can often alias
the byte sequence. So we want the byte sequence to be in the region. A trick
that I have considered to help with this is something that lets us pretend
that an immutable byte sequence from the global heap is in a region. This
can work, but it constrains how regions are implemented. If we support this,
then regions cannot be implemented by adding a base pointer (of the region)
to a per-object offset.

# Tags for Search

tag:linear, tag:mutable
