# Type Intersection Analysis Instead of Alias Tracking

## Revisiting Old Ideas

In Futhark, it is possible to do this (this is not the real syntax):

    let x : Array Int = ... // allocate and initialize a fresh array
    let y = x[1:]           // tail of x, aliasing
    let total = sum(y)
    let z = x with [4] = 42 // write to array

We are allowed to read from `y` as long as we do it before either `x` or `y`
is modified. This requires tracking aliases, which is complicated and requires
assigning names to things. I've been thinking about other ways to accomplish
something similar to this. The entry from 2023-01-03 is a good starting point.
I'm going to adapt the "borrow" construct that I suggested at that time. My
comments about the suggestions I made on 2023-01-03 are:

* Borrowing an index function does not let us call functions like `sum` that
  work on immutable arrays. The advantage is that we do not have to worry
  about the borrowed array escaping. But the disadvantage overwhelms this.
* The state token trick works very well, but it requires tagging all immutable
  array with a state token. This is a significant user-facing burden.

## Introducing New Idea

Instead of tracking possible escape with a state token, we could just restrict
what can be returned from the borrow. Borrowing converts `Array* A` to `Array A`,
so the borrow block must not return A value whose type might contain
`Array A`. Surprisingly (to me at least), it is sound to return `Array* A`,
which mitigates some of the issues. These return types are not allowed:

* Array A
* Option (Array A)
* record { age : Int, children : Array A }
* X, where X is opaque. The exception is that the type A can be returned
  even if A is opaque because `A ~ Array A` is not possible.

The last one is notable. It means that we cannot borrow from a mutable array
and return an ordered map (assuming that the internal representation is
hidden using module-system features). But maybe this is an acceptable
compromise. Let's see which functions have return types that could be
passed straight through:

* sum
* selection of an individual element
* permutation (always allocates a new array)
* filter (possibly, depends on whether or not filter always allocates)

That's actually pretty good. I might go forward with this.

# Tags for Search

tag:borrow, tag:futhark, tag:mutable, tag:array, tag:unique
