# Quickly Bootstrap a Programming Language Ecosystem

## Background

A problem that Haskell faces is that it lacks high-quality integrations
with many data stores. Things like Kafka, MQTT, Clickhouse, even Postgres.
Some might argue that Haskell does have a high-quality Postgres integration,
but I disagree. What Haskell has is bindings to `libpq`, which makes it possible
to talk to postgres, but it exposes an interface that is far from idiomatic
in Haskell.

Other languages have more integrations available. Golang, for example, has
integrations with Kafka, MQTT, Clickhouse, and Postgres. The Kafka and 
Postgres integrations are both of notable quality, and they are both written
in Go rather than being bindings to C. I am not certain how well the MQTT
clients work, but there are Paho (an MQTT client written in C) bindings.
The clickhouse client has a confusing API and is poorly documented, but it
does work.

The integrations that Golang has are there in part because people want to
be able to cross compile easily. So people have been willing to sink a lot
of human time into creating native libraries. (GHC doesn't easily support
cross compilation today, so this same incentive does not exist in its
ecosystem.)

People are drawn to languages that have the integrations that they need.
A language ought to make building these integrations as easy as possible.
Programmers can use all sorts of hacks (like code generation) to work around
the difficulties of building an integration. And they do. Golang doesn't
make it particularly easy to build these libraries, but with enough time,
people are able to build them. Or at least some of them. And some of them
are still not pleasant to use.

What would a programming language need to provide to make it easier for
the user to build these integrations? I've been thinking about Kaitai Struct
recently. It's an interesting little single-purpose language for decoding
(but not encoding) data formats. Most impressive is the gallery. But it
has some flaws. The language itself is YAML with an ad-hoc PL inside of
string values. It has a `switch` construct, but the language has a hard
time talking about data, not just variants but even ordinary product types.
The output from the Java backend, which I looked into on 2024-04-07,
is very unidiomatic. But in spite of the flaws, I'm very drawn to it.
And that's because of two things:

1. There are a lot of examples in the gallery.
2. There are backends for visual inspection and for producing diagrams.

Number 1 is interesting because it proves that it is possible for a small
number of contributors to describe a large number of formats with this
approach. Number 2 is interesting because it provides users with a powerful
way to debug their decoders. This debugging tool is not available to
people writing parsers in an general-purpose PL.

## Proposal

I think that something like Kaitai Struct would be a useful addition to
help bootstrap a new language's ecosystem of integrations. It would be even
better if it could also be used to describe encoding. Bidirectionality is
nice, but it requires a much more constrained language. With a decoder,
it is possible to lift arbitrary functions into the decoder (think of
Haskell's `Applicative` and `Arrow` typeclasses). But for a codec to work
in both directions, every possible transformation has to be something that
is reversible.

What is the best way to go about this? One possibility is to create a
general-purpose metalanguage for staged computation. Another possibility
is to make the integration even tigther and just create a domain-specific
language with first-party support (just have the compiler support the
language directly). There is some precedent for this second approach.
Even though compilers typically do not support LALR-parser languages
directly, the build tools that evolve around them do. Cabal, for example,
supports Alex and Happy.

# Dependent Types and Module Systems

I thought about the different between DT and module systems a long time ago,
but I wanted to revisit this since I now understand module system better.

Most of what I am describing is related to a single language decision:
rejecting nominally defined data types. All data types are defined
structurally, and we can define type aliases but not truly new types.

## Type Abstraction

The basic idea is that a module (in the sense that SML uses the word) is
just a record in a DT language. For example:

    type Ordering = record
      { e : Type
      , lt : e -> e -> Bool
      , eq : e -> e -> Bool
      }
    IntOrdering : Ordering = record
      { e = Int
      , lt = ...
      , eq = ...
      }

An SML module functor is just a function that takes a record as an argument
and returns another record. SML has features that give the user control
over the opacity of certain types. For example, suppose that a user (of a DT
language) wants to build an ordered-map module and hide the representation
of the ordered map:

    // Ordered map with integral keys and string elements
    OrderedMap = record
      { Map : Type = record { ... }
      , empty : Map
      , insert : Map -> Int -> String -> Map
      , lookup : Map -> Int -> Option String
      }

All DT languages that I am aware of would expose the definition of `Map`.
Effectively, `Map` is just an alias that is expanded in the type signatures
of `empty`, `insert`, and `lookup`. It doesn't even need to exist.

This deficiency of DT languages is something that I am no longer bothered by.
I don't think that this kind abstraction is a desirable feature. I think that
other forms of abstraction are useful, but just not this one. That is, I think
that it is not important for users to be able to define a type and some
operations on the type and then hide the type in a way that no consumer of
the API has access to its representation. With this in mind, here is how
I would represent the ordered map:

    OrderedMapTy m = Record
      { empty : m
      , insert : m -> Int -> String -> m
      , lookup : m -> Int -> Option String
      }
    Map : Type = record { ... }
    OrderedMap : OrderedMapTy Map = record { ... }
    WithOrderedMap : ((m : Type) -> OrderedMapTy m -> a) -> (x : Type) -> OrderedMapTy x -> a
    WithOrderedMap f x y = f x y

A user may write code that in such a way that the code does have access to
the representation of ordered maps. But it is up to the user to do this.

## Proofs, Refinements, Subtyping

This isn't really a module-system issue, but it's something I would have to
figure out. I looked at modeling refinements with DT on 2023-10-16.
But at the time, I had been trying to do more powerful things with
refinements. This included:

* Having them work support abstract numbers (numbers that are not known at
  compile time)
* Having a story for supporting both monomorphic and polymorphic containers.
* Using subtyping to have the compiler perform some of the trivial
  refinement transformations.

I never found a satisfactory answer, and I gave up.
