# Bad Interaction Between Self-Recursive Types and Constructor Masking

Consider the List type:

    { @ListS64 = construction
      { Cons = present { head = S64 , tail = ^0 }
      , Nil = present {}
      }
    ; ...
    }

Now, consider the List type with masked constructors as it may appear after
allocating a cons cell:

    { @ListS64 = construction
      { Cons = present { head = S64 , tail = ^0 }
      , Nil = absent {}
      }
    ; ...
    }

But now when we attempt to interpret recursion, we run into a problem. We
have to answer this question: Is the tail allowed to include Nil? For lists,
the answer is obvious. Of course we do not want to ban Nil. If we did, all
the inhabitants of the type would be infinite. So for lists, we never want
constructor masking to be pushed down. But for other self-recursive types,
it is actually useful to push this information down into the types of the
children.

So, we really need two different ways to talk about constructor filtering.
One way communicates that we are only talking about the top level. And the
other way communicates that we are talking about all levels. This only
matters for self-recursive types.

The way that I have previously implemented this, the masking of constructors
ended up being pushed down. I think that I need to add a second notion of
"can this data constructor be present" that only applies to the top level.
It is possible to do something similar for field refinements, but the top-level
version of this is much less useful. For data constructors, we have to be able
to track which one was used at the top level so that we can perform assignment
on a mutable record.
