# Read-Write Capability On Objects, Not Regions

I tried writing some example type signatures based on the system that I have
been thinking of. Here is the function for spliting an array of octets:

    split : {r : rwa} -> U8 -> Array U8 @r -> Array (Array U8) @r

From the type signature alone, it is not clear whether or not this mutates
the argument array. I have realized that the write capability should be
associated with the objects, not with the entire region:

    write : {r : -a} ->       Array U8 @r +w -> S64 -> U8 -> Unit
    split : {r : +a} -> U8 -> Array U8 @r -w -> Array (Array U8) @r -w

The function `write` does not require an allocate capability for the
region, but it does require the write capability for its argument array.
The second function `split` does need an allocate capability for the
region. But it does not write to the array, so it does not need the write
capability for it. Something strange about this is that we might actually
want to be able to mutate the result, and if we originally had the write
capability on the array, it should technically be possible to do this
(because the function body gets write capability on the newly allocated
array of arrays). So, we could also have:

    split : {r : +a} -> U8 -> Array U8 @r +w -> Array (Array U8) @r +w

And both of these functions have the exact same implementation. This
suggests that it might make sense to support capability polymorphism:

    split : {r : +a} -> {c} -> U8 -> Array U8 @r c -> Array (Array U8) @r c

We can instantiate `c` with `+w` or `-w`.

There is something not right about this. In the implementation of `split`,
we need to be able to write our read-only arrays to the newly allocated
(mutable) array. This suggests a type like `Array (Array U8 -w) +w`, but
that means that write permission does not get pushed down into the object.
This is tricky. If we do not push permission levels all the way down,
our APIs get confusing.

Aliasing is a very real problem, so I'm not keen on just giving up. I want
it to be possible to use functions like `split`, `reverse` (persistent
variant), and `toUpper` (persistent variant) without having to worry
that the implementation modifies the arguments.

I think that it might be necessary to make polymorphic instantiations include
the read-write capability. Let's try:

    split : {r : +a}        -> U8 -> Array U8 -w @r -> Array (Array U8 -w) +w @r
    split : {r : +a} -> {c} -> U8 -> Array U8  c @r -> Array (Array U8  c) +w @r

This works, but it is a lot to deal with. Remember, when the read-write
capability was on the region, we have:

    split : {r : rwa} -> U8 -> Array U8 @r -> Array (Array U8) @r

Which is a lot shorter. It would be ideal if we could make this work with just
the allocate capability:

    split : {r : ra} -> U8 -> Array U8 @r -> Array (Array U8) @r

Now it's clear that we are not modifying the argument. But is such a thing
possible? What if we had a primitive like this:

    withWrite : {r : ra} -> {d : Type} -> ({s : rwa} -> {c : Type} -> c @s -> b c @s) -> d @r -> b d @r

The callback must work on any type `c`, so it is not possible to modify
the value of type `c` in the callback. But this makes `c` much too opaque.
We cannot read from it either. We need something like this:

    withWrite : {r : ra} -> {d : Type} -> ({s : rwa} -> d @s-w -> b c @s) -> d @r -> b d @r

This is a strange blend of the two systems. We have a per-object write
capability, but we also have a per-region write capability. I don't like
this. The per-object capabilities are going to end up everywhere.

The `split` function is a particularly trying example. For the persistent
versions of `reverse` and `toUpper`, the region of the result is unrelated
to the region of the argument:

    // Note: might be able to drop write capability on dst if I can
    // figure out how to do this for "split".
    reverse : {src : r} -> {dst: rwa} -> Array U8 @src -> Array U8 @dst

Maybe my problem is not as common as I think it is. For nearly all mutable
data structures, you need both allocate and write together. For constructing
objects, we only really need read and allocate. If we really needed write
permission while constructing an object, we could probably build the object
in its own temporary region and then copy it at the end. Maybe for `split`,
I could just work around the problem with something like this:

    // Crashes if any slice is out of bounds
    slice : {r : ra} -> Array a @r -> Array{n} (S64,S64) @? -> Array{n} (Array a) @r

The function `slice` has to be implemented as a primitive. We can build
the offset-length argument in a temporary region, populate it, and then
apply the slices to build the array that we actually want. Alternatively,
`split` could just be a primop. Let's see how many other functions need
something like this. From `Data.ByteString`:

    group :: ByteString -> [ByteString]
    split :: Word8 -> ByteString -> [ByteString] 

This is actually pretty uncommon. I might just be able to add primops for
the few important cases.

Let's go back to the example of `reverse`. How do we build a variant that
does not require the write capability?

    reverse : {src : r} -> {dst: rwa} -> Array U8 @src -> Array U8 @dst

I think we can repurpose the `withWrite` primitive that I suggested earlier:

    withWrite : {r : ra} -> ({s : rwa} -> b @s) -> b @r

This says that if we can create something in a region without using anything
else in that region, we can drop the requirement of a write capability.
Because we are only writing to things that we just made. This is actually
pretty cool. It means that in certain use cases (but not all use cases)
where we are adding things to a region without modifying anything else that
was already in that region, we don't need the write capability.

But crucially, we still have a problem where creating objects that reference
existing objects might require us to have the write capability. I can plug
a few of these gaps by making `split` a builtin and by making object creation
(with full assignment at time of creation) only require the allocate
capability. It might not be that important to fix this though.

Here's another variant of `withWrite`:

    withWrite :
         {r : ra}
      -> {c : Type}
      -> {d : Type}
      -> {f : Type -> Type}
      -> ({s : rwa} -> {e : Type} -> e @s -> f e @s)
      -> d @r
      -> f d @r

This says that we can gain write access to a region if we forget everything
about the existing types. We can still refer to any of the binders that refer
to objects in region `r`, but we don't know what their types are any more,
which makes it impossible to mutate them.

This strategy only works with polymorphic types, like arrays. And it only
works when we don't need to know anything about the values in the callback.
We could implement the `slice` function suggested earlier using this.

Still, it's kind of unsatisfactory.
