# Constant Data and Nullary Data Constructors

In the programming language I'm working on, an issue that I have encountered
deals with the representation of constant data. In this language, we have
both functions and (immutable) values at the top level. Any top-level value
is a constant. What language is used to represent these values? The only
thing that makes sense is to represent these as value-like types. That
means that we can use data constructors, literals, and references to other
values.

We need a keyword to introduce the application of a data constructor a constant
data. Something like this:

    constant @MyList Cons { head = 55, tail = constant @MyList Nil {} }

The expression bound to fields must not contain binders that are local
to the function. That is, we clear out the context before typechecking
the fields. They may, however, contain references to top-level values:

    { @xs0 = constant @MyList Nil {}
    ; @xs1 = constant @MyList Cons { head = 55, tail = @xs0 }
    ; @xs2 = constant @MyList Cons { head = 42, tail = @xs1 }
    ; ...
    }

What else may they contain? What about function application? Technically,
this does make sense. If the function is applied to arguments that are
all top-level values (fully known), then we can compute the result. So,
it seems like we could allow this. Similarly, we could allow an expression
that does not refer to locals. This includes arithmetic, computations that
define and use join points, and initialize-write-freeze style data. Although
at some point, we have to perform the reduction. So maybe there are two stages.
In the earlier stage, we are more permissive, and then in the later stage, we
allow only literals, data constructor application, and references to top-level
data.

An important question here is where or not we want the hastle of dealing with
references to top-level data. We could just require it to be copied into
every use site. Then the deduplication could happen later. This is the most
simple solution, so I think it's what I am going to try doing. The plan
will be:

* There is no construct for top-level constant data
* All constant data is inlined into each use site
* A higher-level language that is built on top will make it possible to
  perform pure computation when building constant values.
