# Exporting Module Signatures from Modules

I need to figure out how to deal with this. The problem is that
module signatures live at the kind level. Roughly:

* Values: constants, functions, modules (that do not include types)
* Types: Int, Function Types, Module Types, Width Types (W8, W16, W32, W64),
  Signedness Types (Signed, Unsigned)
* Kinds: Star, Function, Sig, Width, Signedness

If we arrange things this way, where do functors fit in? First,
let's think about what universes can be used as the domain and
the codomain:

* Yes: Type -> Type   (type constructors like `List`)
* Yes: Type -> Value  (polymorphic functions like `id`)
* Yes: Value -> Value (module functors, build finite maps from an ordering function)
* No: Value -> Type   (full dependent types)

We could say that `Value -> Value` functors are themselves values
and are eligible for inclusion in modules. The other two I'm less sure of.
It's nice to be able to define a polymorphic function in a module though.
Notice how types are defined above, it's not possible to create new types.
There is a universe of all possible types, and at any place in the program,
any type may be constructed. With type-level let bindings, we can share
these with more convenient names, but we cannot export them from modules.
This doesn't technically reduce expressivity, but it's a horrible interface
for a human user. If an author writes a library and define types (really just
aliases) that are a user-facing part of the API, there must be some way to
share these aliases. The answer cannot be "just copy all these type-level
let bindings into your project". What about have two kinds of modules?
Let's call the one that operates at a higher universe level a "package".
Every member of a package is a type.

    package Base
      List      : Function11(Star)(Star) = ...
      Integer   : Star = ...
      Ordering  : Function11(Star)(Sig) = functor1(a) sig{lt : Function00(a,a)(Bool)}

Should a package only contain types, or can it also contain values? I think
that it must be able to contain values. Or it must be able to contain at
least modules. Otherwise, there's no way for a library author to share
anything. Packages are necessarily limited. It is not possible to abstract
over a package, only a module. Let's looked at how ordered maps might work:

    package OrderedMap
      // binary type constructor, args are key and value
      Map  : Star => Star => Star = ...
      Ops  : Star => Star => Sig = \k v -> sig
        { insert : k -> v -> Map k v -> Map k v
        }
      Make : (k : Star) => Star => Base.Ordering(k) => Ops Star Star = \k v -> module
        { insert = ...
        }

A terrible property of this system is that polymorphism happens in the wrong
place for ordered maps. The `Make` functor (which is a Functor10 because it
creates a value from two types and one value) must be provided the element
type. Let's take a detour. Dhall has this in it's documentation:

    ⊦ Type ↝ Type : Type  -- Functions from terms to terms (ordinary functions)
    ⊦ Kind ↝ Type : Type  -- Functions from types to terms (type-polymorphic functions)
    ⊦ Sort ↝ Type : Type  -- Functions from kinds to terms
    ⊦ Kind ↝ Kind : Kind  -- Functions from types to types (type-level functions)
    ⊦ Sort ↝ Kind : Sort  -- Functions from kinds to types (kind-polymorphic functions)
    ⊦ Sort ↝ Sort : Sort  -- Functions from kinds to kinds (kind-level functions)

This suggests that as long as a function lowers something to a term, the
function itself should be considered a term. If I adopt this, I can instead
have:

    package OrderedMap
      // binary type constructor, args are key and value
      Map : Star -> Star -> Star = ...
      Ops : Star -> Sig = \k v -> sig
        { empty : (v : Type) -> Map k v
        , insert : (v : Type) -> (k, v, Map k v) -> Map k v
        }
      Make : (k : Star) => Base.Ordering(k) => Ops Star Star = \k ord -> module
        { empty = \(v : Type) -> ...
        , insert = \(v : Type) -> \(key : k,val : v, m : Map k v) -> ...
        }

This is better. Notice that the module that is the result of `Make` cannot
have a member that is a type. This means that it cannot include the `Map`
type itself. Someone using the library must write:

    let IntMapType = OrderedMap.Map(Int) 
    let IntMapModule = Make(Int,IntOrdering)
    let myMap : IntMapType(Unit) = IntMapModule.insert(Unit)(42,Unit,IntMapModule.empty)

Something I did above without justifying it is using `Map` in the body of
`Ops`. Really, `Map` should not be in scope at this point in time. It
might make more sense to do this:
 
    let Map : Star -> Star -> Star = ...
    package OrderedMap
      // binary type constructor, args are key and value
      Map = Map
      ...

This might cause problems when generating documentation, but it makes the
implementation more straightforward.

One limitation of this approach is that it's not possible to bundle a bunch
of types together for use in a module functor. It doesn't limit expressiveness,
but it makes it more annoying to write certain things. Maybe this could be
improved by introducing a module-like construct that only contains types.
This would live at the same universe level as `Int` and `W8` but it would
have a different kind for itself. For example:

    MyTypes = Types
      { Resource = S32
      , ReceiveException = MyExceptionType
      , SendException = MyOtherType
      } : TypeModule { Resource : Star, ReceiveException : Star, SendException : Star}

And the we could write things like:

    MyFuncs : TypeModule { Resource : Star, ReceiveException : Star, SendException : Star} -> Sig
    MyFunctor
       = (t : TypeModule { Resource : Star, ReceiveException : Star, SendException : Star})
      -> (m : MyFuncs(t))
      -> module { ... }

We have no way to share `TypeModule` because it is a kind. Maybe it could be a
type instead. That's not too strange. After all, the function type `Int -> Int`
refers to `Int`, but they both live at the same level.

# Final Design

Here's what I've ended up on:

    42 : Int
    Int : Type
    Type : Star
    Star : Kind
    λ(a : Int) -> a + 1      : Int -> Int
    (a : Type) -> (b : Type) : Function
    Int -> Int               : Function // a concrete example of previous rule
    Function                 : Kind // a concrete example of previous rule
    W8                       : Width
    Width                    : Kind
    Signed                   : Signedness
    Signedness               : Kind
    module { x = 42 }        : Module { x : Int }
    Module { x : Int }       : Signature
    Signature                : Kind
    λ(a : Module A) -> (? : Module B)  : Module A -> Module B
    Module A -> Module B               : Function
    (a : Type) -> a -> a     : Function
    Array                    : Star -> Star
    Star -> Star             : Kind

Let's specifically think through the arrows. First, the rules:

    Expr  [0] = <numeric-literal> | true | false | let binder = Expr in Expr
    Value [1] = Constant Expr
              | function(binder : Type : Star)(Type : Star) { Expr }
              | vfunctor(binder : Type)(Type) { Value }
              | tfunctor(binder : Kind)(Type) { Value }
              | module { label = Value }
              | vlet binder = Value in Value
    Type  [2] = Int | Bool | W8 | W16 | W32 | W64
              | Module (Map String Type)
              | Types (Map String Kind)
              | Function(Type : Star)(Type : Star)
              | VFunctor(Type)(Type)
              | TFunctor(Kind)(Type)
    Kind  [3] = Star
              | Width
              | Signedness
              | Types!
              | Module!
              | Function!
              | VFunctor!
              | TFunctor!
              | KFunctor(Kind,Kind)

To define a function, we must refer to a type. For example: `function(x : Int) { ... }`.
Is this a problem? I don't think so. Examples of arrow kinding:

    Function(Int)(Bool)                       : Function!            : Kind
    VFunctor(Module {...})(Module {...})      : VFunctor!            : Kind
    List                                      : KFunctor(Star)(Star) : Kind
    List(Unit)                                : Star                 : Kind
    Bounded                                   : KFunctor(Signedness)(KFunctor(Width)(Star)) : Kind
    Bounded(Signed)(W8)                       : Star                 : Kind
    Module {equals : Function(Int,Int)(Bool)} : Module!              : Kind
    Types {map : Star, element : Star}        : Types!               : Kind

Having `Types` is not necessary, but it illustrates that it fits nicely into
the system.

Something worth noting: This system cannot be used to tie recursively build
data types with module functors. The reason is that a tfunctor can accept
a type as an argument, but it cannot return a type as part of its output.
So a recursive `vlet` is not able to tie the knot for types. But it is able
to define mutually recursive functions. Intuitively, this seems right since
all SML derivatives that I'm aware of prohibit feeding the result of a
module functor application back into itself as an argument.

As a next step, I need to figure out how refinements and uniqueness types
can be integrated into this.

In my original experiment, types of kinds `Star`, `Width`, and `Signedness`
all lived in `Value`. This meant that `tfunctor` and `vfunctor` were handled
by a single construct (`functor`). And it meant that types (like `Int`)
could appear as members of modules. This design was unsatisfactory for
several reasons:

* Value-level recursive let bindings, needed for mutually recursive functions,
  are not appropriate for types. They make it possible to create types with an
  infinite expansion.
* If types can appear as members of modules, then modules (and projection from
  modules) must be permitted in type signatures. But modules also include
  implementations of functions. And functions are never supposed to appear in
  type signatures. This wasn't an insurmountable problem. It was just
  something that was strange.
* In either formulation, unary module functors cannot accept a module with both
  a types and functions that operate on that type. This is a major deviation
  from SML. It means that there is no need for `where type` or
  `sharing type` because we can just apply the outer module functor to the
  type that we want to require. It might also make higher-order functors
  easier to support, but I don't remember anymore.
* TODO: This also might help with the resolution-tracking issue
  from 2024-02-07, but I'm not certain that it does.
