# Parse Failure Context

I realized that it is possible to build a parse failure context on the way
back up when a parse failure occurs. There is no need to build the context
on the way down. This is important because it gets rid of one of the
situations that I wanted stack allocation for.

# The Case for LL(1) Codegen

An often cited advantage of LL(1) languages is that programmers implement
them directly without using code generation. While this is technically true,
I have come across several reasons why a program might want to generate
a parser for an LL(1) language from a CFG:

* Static analysis ensures that the language is actually LL(1). Especially
  if epsilon is involved (for example, when there things that can occur
  optionally), it can be difficult to convince oneself that a parser
  does not actually have any ambiguity.
* Sometimes, several productions of the same rule share a prefix, but it is
  easy to rewrite the grammar in such a way that the common prefix is factored
  out. It is easy for a machine to do this, and the grammar can be more
  intelligible if the prefix is not factored out. I think that supporting this
  additional fragment is important. Every time I write a parser by hand and
  manually perform this reactor, it obscures the intent.
* There are at least two extremely common situations where it is useful
  to extend our grammar language with additional constructs: repetition
  and intercalation. While it is possible to define both of these in a
  parser combinator library, it is difficult to reason about whether or not
  they have been used in a way that makes the grammar ambiguous. Again,
  static analysis can help us here.
* We can get decent (but not great) error messages for free if we generate
  the parser from a high-level CFG description.
