# Sigils

Continuing from 2024-01-08. We have three sigils:

* At sign (`@`): Components (includes user-defined global constants)
* Dollar (`$`): Local Variables
* Caret (`^`): Recursive type debruijn index

# Integers

I was thinking about numeric literals. I have been using an unadorned
literal to mean a signed 64-bit integer. I want to keep doing that.
I think it would be fine to use lowercase prefixes for the other
integral types. For example:

    { myLittleNumber : U8 = u8 42
    , myBigNumber : S32 = s32 1000000
    }

Also, the integral types `U8`, `S16`, etc. are all just aliases. The real
types look like this:

    Int Unsigned W8
    Int Signed W16

We have to be able to write the real types as well because users need to
work with variable widths and variable signedness:

    functor(W : Width) functor (A : Type)
      { M = ...
      ; insertImpl = function(m : M, key : Int Unsigned @W, value : @A)(Map) { ... }
      ; module
        { Map = @M
        , insert = @insertImpl
        }
      }


# Refinements

The types that users are allowed to do anything sophisticated with must
all be refined types. For example, when a user defines an alias for
a boxed type, it's actually a refined type where the refinements do not
prohibit any values. Why? Consider a parametrically polymorphic function,
not directly definable in the system I'm trying to build but approximated
by a functor that takes a type argument and returns a function. We must
be able to pass a refined type as the type argument. But we also want to
be able to pass an unrefined type. To accomplish this, we need a mechanism
to lift an unrefined type into its refined equivalent (with no actual
refinements applied). Lets say that we have something like this:

    data RawType = Int Signedness Width | Bool | Constructed ...
    data Type = Type RawType Prohibitions // raw type and prohibitions must agree with each other
    probihit : Prohibitions -> Type -> Type

This system involves layering refinements one-by-one, but the layers
are merged eagerly as they are added. So we have

    U8 : Type
    U16 : Type
    U16 ==> Type (Int Signed 16) EmptySet
    U16{not less than 0}{not greater than 100} : Type

We should probably represent the refinements as a set of allowed values, not
a set of prohibited values. So actually we have this:

    U16 ==> Type (Int Signed 16) [0..65535]

When we flatten these, we take the union. What kind of syntax do we want
for this? Probably just adding refinements with a refine keyword in front:

    type AnyInteger = S64
    type Natural = refine [0..9223372036854775807] S64

To keep the language LL(1), we need to be able to parse a refinement without
knowing what type it refines. We can refine integers, boxed types, and
booleans. The syntax for integers and boxed types does not interfere:

    [0..100, 200..500]
    [Branch, Node]

But a refinement for booleans might interfere to the refinement for boxed
types. Refining booleans is useless though, so we could disallow it.
Or since there are only four options, we could have four keywords (without
any use of brackets):

    true
    false
    anybool
    nobool

It's kind of silly, but it mostly works. One problem is that `[]` is ambiguous.
We cannot tell if it refers to an integral refinement or a data-constructor
refinement. So, we probably need `no int` and `no constructor` as keywords
for this case. The need for these should be rare though. Ultimately, we want
to be unmarshalling to something like this:

    data Predicate
      = Integral RangeSet
      | Boolean (Set Bool)
      | Constructed (Set ConId)

As an alternative, we could use curly braces for refinements of constructed
types:

    [0..100, 200..500]
    {Branch = any, Node = any}

And then the ambiguity is gone. I have had to add an equals sign though
because I am trying to use curly braces in a uniform way throughout the
language. For data constructor refinements, we could go a step further and
allow refinements to the fields:

    {Branch = {}, Node = {value = [0..20]}}

Any field not mentioned is not restricted beyond the restrictions originally
imposed by the type declaration. Now our predicate type looks like this:

    data NestedMap = NestedMap (Map ConId (Map FieldId Predicate))
    data Predicate
      = ...
      | Constructed NestedMap

# Type Equality, Subtyping

Once we start talking about deep refinements of constructed data, we have to
address another question: under what circumstances is a type a subtype of
another type. Suppose that we have:

    Person = constructed
      {Person { name = Array U8, age = refine [0..1000] S64}}
    YoungPerson = constructed
      {Person { name = Array U8, age = refine [0..90] S64}}

Are values of type `YoungPerson` implicitly upcasted to `Person`. The answer
is yes. They must be. If deep refinements to constructed types are possible,
then the types synthesized by merely constructing values include refinements:

    construct @Person Person {name = "drew", age = 100}
    ==> // synthesizes type
    constructed
      { name = Array (refine [...] U8)
      , age = refine [100] S64
      }

What's happening here is that the fields of the `Person` type alias
that we created earlier are treated as upper bounds. The synthesize type
may be smaller than the type given as the first argument to `construct`.

However, all of the same data constructors must be present. Otherwise,
the types are incompatible. We cannot upcast from types with fewer data
constructors to types with more data constructors because the integral
representations of the data constructor tags will not match when code
is lowered. But, we can use a refinement to say that a data constructor
will not appear. This produces a similar effect but is not really the
same thing. In particular, you cannot "enlarge" a type from code that
did not know about the larger type.

So, to handle refinements of constructed types, we must normalize by
pushing field refinements down into the type and leaving
data-constructor-existence refinements in the refinement. To start,
I can forego push-down field refinements entirely since those are just
syntactic sugar.
