# Case Expressions Without Refinement Types

I have thought for a long time that the best way to incorporate scrutiny
of ADTs into a type system is to use refinement. Something like this:

    // (xs : List Foo | {Nil,Cons})
    case xs:
      Nil (ys : List Foo | {Nil}) -> ...
      Cons (ys : List Foo | {Cons}) -> ...

But I have run into some disappointments with subtyping. It does not play
nicely with equirecursive types (checking types for equality is difficult).
Additionally, when lowering to C, subtyping causes repeated casts to the
same type over and over. Once we have a list that we know is a Cons, we
would like to be able to have a value of type `struct Cons` in our C code
rather than downcasting from `struct List` over and over. There is no
performance impact. It's just a situation where the C code becomes less
readable.

So, what I was thinking was that we could have this instead:

    // (xs : List Foo)
    case xs:
      Nil (ys : List.Nil Foo) -> ...
      Cons (ys : List.Cons Foo) -> ...

This causes `Nil` and `Cons` to act like their are actually different types.
We can still upcast back to `List` if we need to, but it cannot be done
implicitly. It must be explicit. But it still has no cost.

Interestingly, this approach maps to C much better:

    switch(xs->tag) {
      case 0: ... // nil
      case 1:
        struct Cons* ys = (struct Cons*)xs;
        ...
      default: exit(1);
    }

# Explicit Upcasting Instead of Subtyping

We can go even further. What if we get rid of all subtyping and require
the coercion to be explicit (like the coercions in GHC Core). Let's consider
integers:

    x : (Int | <50) = ...
    y : (Int | <100) = coerce(Int)(<50)(<100)(...)(x)

The fourth argument of coerce is a proof that everything that is less than
50 is also less than 100. This proof is trivial. Many of these proofs will
be trivial. We need to be able to lift proofs over type constructors. For
example, given:

    p : Predicate Int
    q : Predicate Int
    someProof : Subtype p q
    t : Type -> Type
    xs : t (Int | p)
    liftCoercion(t)(Int)(p)(q)(someProof)(xs)

This is weird, but it is necessary. All types are just base types (which
are unrefined) equipped with a refinement, so the form `t (a | p)` is
required for a type constructor application. The form of `liftCoercion`
implies that we need to be able to talk about types and predicates on
their own though. We also need variants of `liftCoercion`. It is actually
an infinite family of functions that operate on type constructors of
any arity and arguments in any position. I only want to support positive
types, so this is sound.

# Advantages of This System

The primary advantage of doing this is that the type system does not
need to support subtyping. But we can still regain some of the ergonomics
of subtyping. The high-level language can construct the proofs (and the
upcasts) automatically. It doesn't have to build all of them automatically.
But it should at least do some of them. For example, the type of any
literal integer includes a refinement that locks down the value to that
one number. But almost any time a literal integer is written in code,
the author does not intend such a restricted type. So we could build the
upcast while typechecking. This can be an incremental process, and it is
possible to only support what is needed as I need it. This would free me
of the difficulty of dealing with refinements on fields in equirecursive
types, something that is unlikely to even be important initially. I could
go back later and add implicit coercions if I even needed them.

# Extending Coercions to Recursive Types

If we extend this same idea to recursive types, we end up with isorecursive
types instead of equirecursive types. And as before, this makes typechecking
more simple. The typechecker only has to answer the question "are these types
exactly equal to one another?", and that is not a difficult question to answer.

When we lower to C, however, we need for all equivalent forms of a recursive
type to be lowered to the same C struct. This is because we need the cast
(that is required for isorecursive types) to be a no-op. This is doable.
We have to convert recursive ADTs to DFSA, minimize them, and then hash
the DFSA. DFSA conversion (and minimization) is typically used to determine
equivalence of equirecursive types, but I'm only using it to make a C lowering
work out better.
