# Recursive Modules Continued

This continues the entry from 2023-12-31.

Evaluating (lowering) a group of recursively bound functions is simple. Begin by
assigning an ID to each of them. Then evaluate the bodies with all the ID
resolutions in the context. There are two different maps: resolutions and function
bodies. In the first step, we update just the resolutions map. In the second step,
we deal with the function bodies map.

When modules are involved, we have the signatures at our disposal even before
the modules are evaluated. If the recursively bound modules only contain
functions, we should be able to begin by assigning function IDs (as before)
and adding module resolutions to the resolutions map. What else can appear
as a member of a module:

* Function: Already described
* Module: Recurse. Resolve child modules in the same way as the parent.
* Functor: Close over the context (including everything bound in the recursive
  group) like normal.
* Type: This one is a little weird. We need to somehow convert types to the
  debruijn representation that we normally use. We could start by just prohibiting
  type aliases from appearing in recursively bound groups.

# Signatures Without Types

I considered this on 2023-12-31, but I want to revisit it again. Excluding
types from module signatures is a powerful simplification, but it might degrade
the user experience. Consider some code that needs a map with string keys and
string values:

    MyWebServer = functor(map : Type)(ops : Module{insert : Function(String,String,map)(map)}) { ... }

This is fine so far. Now let's consider a module functor that creates an
ordered map:

    OrdMap = functor(k : Type)(ord : Module {lt : Function(k,k)(Bool)})(v : Type) =
    { mapTy = ...
    ; module
      { M : Type = mapTy
      , insert : Function(k,v,mapTy)(mapTy)
      }
    }

Now we can instantiate `MyWebServer` like this:

    strStrMap = OrdMap(string)(stringOrd)(string)
    MyWebServer(strStrMap.M)(strStrMap)

So we can have types (like `M`) exposed by module, but these types are really
just there as aliases. This is a pretty firm commitment to the fully transparent
types. There is not a way to hide types if we do this. It also makes the user
experience worse. In SML, `MyWebServer` would take one argument, not two. But
it gives us these simplicitations to signatures:

* None of the members of a module signature may referrence another member
* SML's `where type` construct is no longer needed. Instead, we can just
  apply the outer functor to a specific type.

Here are the disadvantages:

* Functors need more arguments. If the SML equivalent of a signature included
  5 types, this would mean that our functor would instead take 6 arguments
  (5 types plus all the module with all the functions).
* Assigning just some of the types (without assigning all of them) can be
  difficult depending on their positions.

It's strange. This feels like an ergonomic disaster, but it makes any
implementation more simple. I've consider trying to get the best of both
worlds by having module signatures take two sets of arguments. If the types
come first and then the functions can depend on the types, it seems like this
would work. But then there is the question of where modules and functors
belong. We probably want them to be able to depend on types, so maybe they
should go with the functions. Here is a hypothetical syntax:

    MyWebServer = functor(ops : Module{M : Type}{insert : Function(String,String,M)(M)}) { ... }

I should think about this more. I am inclined to go with the more simple
option. I don't think it's that common to have signatures that need a bunch
of different types. It can happen, but it's not the common case.

A more accurate way to describe the originally suggested solution
is that module signatures can actually have fields that are types, but
any opaque types are useless in module functors.
