# Representing Many Component Stages with Single Type

I have been playing with this idea in the `TX` module in `lithtwentyfour`.
When compiling components, it is useful to step through several stages:

1. Unrestricted (anything may appear anywhere)
2. Eliminate type-level let bindings (after this, it becomes possible to typecheck) 
3. ANF (only "atomic" expressions or bound names appear in certain positions)
4. Eliminate functors
5. Eliminate modules
6. Eliminate assignments that copy a bound variable to another name (perform
   copy propogation)

I need to think through this all the way. Some of these interactions are
tricky. One important question is whether or not this form is allow:

    let a = <expr>
    let c = a
     in ...

At the very end (right before actually compiling to some kind of machine
instructions), we want to make sure this form does not appear. But for
many of the other stages, it's actually fine to allow this to appear.
In fact, it makes implementations of other functions more simple if this
is allowed. This is because eliminating other constructs (by evaluating
them) may cause a named identifier to appear in their place. Prohibiting
the named identifier from appearing means that something complicated to
to happen. It's easier to just perform the evaluation in the normal way
and then perform copy propagation on the resulting expression.

Why is ANF important? This representation was developed for the benefit
of compiling to machine code, so it's odd to see it applied to module
expressions. I'm really just trying to expose opportunities for CSE.
For CSE, we need everything to be floated up as much as possible. With
functions that evaluate runtime data, floating up can harm performance
since it may cause evaluation that was unneeded. But floating up staged
expressions is never harmful.

It's not even real ANF, but I've been calling it that because it's similar.
Really, what's going on is that there are three kinds of expressions:

* Chained let bindings
* Value expressions (abstraction, application, module definition,
  module projection, function definition, constant definition)
  that can appear as the RHS of a let binding.
* Atoms (named identifiers)

In traditional ANF, numeric constants are also atoms. In the system I'm
working on, that's not relevant, so I've omitted it.

We want to convert to ANF because it makes it easier to float everything up.
Then, we can apply CSE. But then, we need to evaluate functors, and this
causes a problem. Functor evaluation takes up back out of ANF because the
bodies of functors can be let-bound chains. But maybe preserving ANF is
not important. Maybe we just need to evaluate and then reestablish ANF
by running the ANF transformation again.

# Tags for Search

tag:modules, tag:anf
