# Uniqueness and Size Polymorphism

Consider the boolean eliminator that selects one of two unique values:

    choose : Func{r : ro}{a : T4}(bool, *a@r, *a@r)(*a@r) = (b : bool, x : *a@r, y : *a@r)
      if b
        return(x)
      else
        return(y)

If we instantiate `a` with a type like `s32`, then this doesn't need to
do anything special. But if we instantiate `a` with a boxed type, then
we deallocate the object that is not chosen. I was hoping the representation
of the type passed around at runtime would only be consulted during a garbage
collection cycle. However, I can now see that the type representation must
be consulted in any polymorphic function that lets a unique value go out
of scope. This does not have to be a costly operation, but it does add
additional branching logic to the generating C program or assembly.

We might use the low bit (or low byte) of a 64-bit type representation to
indicate whether or not the type has any pointers. That way we could quickly
decide on the no-op for primitive types. For any type that might contain
pointers, we need to jump to a type-specific deallocation routine. Although
most types that may contain pointers are really just pointers themselves.
So maybe we could introduce an additional optimization that tells us
whether or not we are dealing with a pointer. We would end up with
something like this as the type representation:

* 32 bits: Some kind of hash that identifies the type
* 1 bit: does this type have any pointers
* 1 bit: is this type a pointer

The hash that identifies the type could instead by a stack-backed data
structure that fully describes the type. That's probably easier, but it
does make it a full 64-bit pointer in C.

# Easy Optimization Opportunity

For the `choose` example above, a simple optimization opportunity is
just rewriting `choose` to a variant that works on nonunique values
when we see that it is applied to something like `s32` or `u32`. Then
we get to avoid branching entirely.

# Other Optimizations

Certain size classes cannot possibly contain pointers. For example,
anything less than four bytes cannot be a pointer, and it cannot
contain a pointer.

# Uniqueness and Deallocation

In a system with uniqueness types, we can have an explicit deallocate
primitive. It should technically be possible to just infer all places
where this should be called. But providing a primitive for this will
make it possible for me to start building programs without use analysis.

# Region Scoping and Join Points

I realized that we have to move a little further from ANF to accomodate
a `withRegion` construct. We have to be able to bind some result from
`withRegion` (and control flow joins back up at that point). All in-scope
join points go out of scope in the body block of `withRegion`. There
is no sound way to make them stay in scope.

Intuitively, we can think of this as happening because `withRegion`
is a bracket-style (borrowing Haskell terminology) operation. We have
to make sure a region is deallocated. There is no way to get this
guarantee with uniqueness types. We could get this guarantee with
linear types, but the resulting system would be unergonomic and would
require threading the region variable through functions (i.e. as an
argument and a returned value). We would have to introduce a `borrow`
construct to make it ergonomic, but `borrow` itself is another
bracket-style operation. So we would not end up with a system that
was any more simple.

# Faking Borrowing With Regions

Speaking of borrowing, I think we can implement borrowing without second-class
types. Regions and rank-2 types give us enough power:

    borrow :
         (a : Type)
      -> (b : Type)
      -> (r : Region nc+ro)
      -> (s : Region nc+ro)
      -> *a@r
      -> ((t : Region nc+ro) -> a@t -> b@s)
      -> b@s

We cannot allocate into region `t`, and the value of type `a@s` cannot escape.
Perfect. What about the type of region `s`? It's not right. This is the top
type, so any region can be passed in as this argument. But the callback
is unable to allocate anything into region `s`. We want something more like
this:

    borrow :
         (a : Type)
      -> (b : Type)
      -> (r : Region nc+ro)
      -> (y : Capability)
      -> (s : Region y)
      -> *a@r
      -> ((t : Region nc+ro) -> a@t -> b@s)
      -> b@s

We don't normally have to write things in such an awful way, but I think
it's HOF that causes this to be necessary. In fact, I think that `withRegion`
has essentially the same type:

    withNoncollectedRegion :
         (b : Type)
      -> (y : Capability)
      -> (s : Region y)
      -> ((r : Region nc+rw) -> b@s)
      -> b@s

This will both be primitives, so we do not actually need to expose capability
variables to end users. But this does highlight that HOFs will not play nicely
with this system.

# Trick for Join Points to C

Lowering non-recursive join points to C is almost simple:

    foo = join(x : s64, y : s64)
      body
    expr
    ==>
    int64_t x = 0;
    int64_t y = 0;
    // We use braces to prevent variables declared here from being
    // visible in the compiled body of foo.
    {
      COMPILE(expr) // Lower jump as: assign x and y, goto foo
    }
    .foo
    {
      COMPILE(body)
    }

There is a problem though. It is possible for `expr` to define
its own identifiers `x` and `y`. In the C code, these might shaddow
the intended assignment targets.

I recently remembered that C supports anonymous structs. This makes
it possible to instead generate:

    struct {int64_t x; int64_t y;} foo_args = {};
    {
      COMPILE(expr) // Lower jump as: assign foo_args.(x|y), goto foo
    }
    .foo
    {
      int64_t x = foo_args.x;
      int64_t y = foo_args.y;
      COMPILE(body)
    }

Now it is not possible to shaddow the identifiers. This strategy also
resolves a difficulty that we encounter when compiling mutually recursive
join points.
