# Low-Level Language Notes

I've been playing with a low-level language. Here are some notes:

* Monomorphization helps keep things simple, especially when we are
  targeting C. It's a shame because in real applications, this will
  generate a ton of redundant code. In particular, it should be
  simple to handle boxed types uniformly. But I think that simplicity
  wins here. I can go back later and manually add primops for a
  few common cases where I see a bunch of duplicated code that is
  doing the same thing on boxed types. If we do not monomorphize,
  then we end up doing a lot of `void*` casting in C, and the C
  compiler is not able to double check our work as much as we
  would like it to.
* Right before lowering to C, it is beneficial to annotate the ANF
  program with types on binders. This way, we do not have to perform
  type synthesis while lowering to C. This only needs to be done right
  before we lower to C. I do not believe it is useful to do this any
  earlier.
* As a completely separate pass, it is beneficial to use refinements
  to search for opportunities to upgrade `Add` and `Index` primitives
  to variants that do not need bounds checking.
* We should let users write programs that do not use ANF. Converting
  to ANF is not difficult. We should have a user-facing syntax.
* At the top level, there should just be functions. Boxed types are
  structural, so they are effectively inlined everywhere. The functions
  have no order. They can all call each other.

Unresolved questions:

* Is it useful to have any kind of namespacing? I don't think so. It would
  make it easier for people to write bigger programs in this language, but
  people aren't supposed to write big programs in this language.
* I want this language to be targeted in several ways. Users can write
  programs directly in this language. A compiler can lower a language with
  polymorphism and a rich module system to this language. A compiler can
  lower a high-level DSL to this language. How do we link these different
  parts together? Some kind of namespacing might help, but I am not totally
  sure how it would. When lowering a DSL (especially one for decoding),
  we will sometimes need to create recursively bound functions. It would
  be nice if this code was, in some way, insulated from the outside world.
  Then the code generator could pick good names for the functions without
  having to worry about a collision. Considering a similar scenario, if a
  user writes a low-level function by hand, they will need to be able to
  reference it from the high-level language. This function might actually
  be a group of functions with a single entrypoint. These low-level functions
  could not call anything from the high-level language because the high-level
  language might use features (like type abstraction) that are not available
  in the low-level language.
* All of this suggests that it might be useful to have groups of
  (possibly recursively bound) functions that can be typechecked and compiled
  as a unit. If there is no other import mechanism (no way to share code),
  we need a strong set of primitives available in all contexts.

So, it's not true namespacing, but it's a single level of indirection.
We want something like this:

    data Chain
      = Let
          GroupId
          (Map FunctionId FunctionDefinition) -- recursively bound, all public
          Chain
      | Terminal GroupId FunctionId

The functions in any group can reference other functions in the same group.
Additionally, they may reference functions from any preceeding group.
Something like this has to exist so that code lowered from the HLL to
the low-level language is able to reference things written in
the low-level language.

There are several possible additions. The first is concurrently bound groups.
This seems reasonable. Another possible addition is the nesting of groups.
Although this is technically possible, I'm not sure that it is useful.
There should not be a way to perform code generation inside of code generation,
so there should be no reason for it.

But maybe the whole idea of groups is unneeded. When we do codegen from a DSL,
we could just say "Here's a bunch of recursively bound functions and an
entrypoint. Please rename all of these when they are grafted into the final
program." I think that makes the most sense.
